the sinners, but the just will over come through the name of the Lord of the spirits; and he will show it to the others, that they may repent, and cease the work of their hands. 3. And they will have no honor before the Lord of the spirits, but in his name they will be saved, and the Lord of the spirits will have mercy on them, for his mercy is great. 4. And he is just in his judgment, and before his glory, and injustice will not stand in his judgment: whosoever will not repent shall be destroyed. 5. Henceforth I will not have mercy on them, says the Lord of the spirits.
   CHAP. 51.-And in those days the earth will return that entrusted to it, and Sheol will return that entrusted to it, which it has received, and hell will return what it owes. 2. And he will choose the just and holy from among them, for the day has come that they be saved.
3. And the Chosen One in those days will sit upon his throne, and all the secrets of wisdom will proceed from the thoughts of his mouth, for the Lord of the spirits has given it to him and has honored him. 4. And in those days the mountains will skip like rams, and the hills spring like lambs satisfied with milk, and they will all be angels in heaven. 5. Their faces will shine in gladness, because the Chosen One has arisen in those days, and the earth will rejoice, and the just will live thereon, and the chosen will walk and move thereon.
   CHAP. 52.-And after those days, at that place, where I had seen all the visions of that which is hidden-for I was taken up by the whirling of the wind and carried toward the west-2. there my eyes saw the secrets of heaven, all things that will be on the earth, a mountain of iron, and a mountain of copper, and a mountain of silver, and a mountain of gold, and a mountain of soft metal, and a mountain of lead. 3. And I asked the angel who went with me, saying: "What are those things which I have seen in secret?" 4. And he said to me: "All these things which thou hast seen are for the power if his Anointed, that he may command and be powerful on the earth." 5. Then this angel of peace answered and said to me: "Wait a little, and thou wilt see, and there will be revealed to thee every secret that the Lord of the spirits has planted. 6. These mountains which thou hast seen, the mountain of iron, and the mountain of copper, and the mountain of silver, and the mountain of gold, and the mountain of soft metal, and the mountain of lead, all these will be before the Chosen One like wax in the presence of fire, and like the water which falls down from above on these mountains, and will be weak before his feet. 7. And it will come to pass in those days that no one will save himself, not with gold and not with silver: no one will be able to save himself or to flee. 8. And there will be no iron for war and no clothing for a breast-plate; metal will not aid and zinc will not aid, and will not be beaten out, and lead will not be desired. 9. And all these things will disappear and be destroyed from the face of the earth, when the Chosen One shall appear before the face of the Lord of the spirits."
CHAP. 53.-And there my eyes saw a deep valley, whose mouth was open, and all those
who dwell upon the earth and sea and islands will bring him gifts and presents and tokens of submission, but that deep valley will not be filled.  2. And they commit crimes with their

hands, and everything they make they devour criminally, they, the sinners; but they will be destroyed in the presence of the Lord of the spirits, they, the sinners, and will be chased from off the face of his earth continually to all eternity. 3. For I have seen the angels of punishment, going and preparing all the instruments for Satan. 4. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me: "These instruments, for whom have they been prepared?" 5. And he said to me: "These are prepared for the kings and the mighty of this earth that they be destroyed with them. 6. And after this the Just and Chosen One will cause the house of his congregation to appear; henceforth it will not be hindered in the name of the Lord of the spirits. 7. And these mountains will be in his presence like the earth, and the hills will be like a fountain of water, and the just will rest from the oppression of the sinners."
   CHAP. 54.-And I looked and turned toward another side of the earth, and I saw there a deep valley with a burning fire. 2. And they brought the kings and the powerful, and put them into the deep valley. 3. And there my eyes saw how they make instruments for them, iron chains of immense weight. 4. And I asked the angel of peace, who went with me, saying: "These chain instruments, for whom have they been prepared?" 5. And he said to me: "These have been prepared for the hosts of Azâzêl, to imprison them and put them into the lowest hell: and their jaws will be covered with rough stones, as the Lord of the spirits has commanded. 6. Michael and Gabriel, Rufael and Fanuel, they will overpower them on that great day, will throw them on that day into the oven of burning fire, that the Lord of the spirits may avenge himself on them on account of their injustice, because they became subject to Satan, and have led astray those who dwell on the earth." 7. And in those days the punishment from the Lord of the spirits will come, and all the repositories of water, which are above in the heavens, and also the fountains of water, which are under the heavens, and which are under the earth, will be opened. 8. And all the waters will be joined with the waters which are above in the heavens; but the water which is in high heaven is the masculine, and the water which is beneath on the earth is the feminine. 9. And then will be destroyed all those who dwell on the earth, and those who dwell under the ends of heaven.
10. And through this they know their injustice, which they have done on the earth, and
therefore they are destroyed.
    CHAP. 55.-And after that the Head of days repented and said: "In vain have I destroyed all who dwell on the earth." 2. And he swore by his great name: "Henceforth I will not do thus to all those who dwell on the earth, and I will place a sign in the heavens; and it will be a token of fidelity between me and them to eternity, as long as heaven is above the earth. 3. And then it will be according to my command; when I desire to overpower them by the hand of the angel on the day of trouble and suffering, before this my anger and my punishment, my anger and my punishment will remain over them," says the Lord of the spirits. 4. "Ye mighty kings, who will dwell on the earth, ye shall be about to see my Chosen One, as he sits on the throne of my glory, and judges Azâzêl and all his associates, and all his hosts in the name of the Lord of the spirits."
   CHAP. 56.-And I saw there the hosts of the angels of punishment walking and holding chains of iron and of metal. 2. And I asked the angel of peace, who went with me, saying:

"To whom are these going, holding them [i.e. the chains]?" 3. And he said to me: "Each one to his chosen and his beloved, that they be thrown into the deep abyss of the valley. 4. And then that valley will be filled with their chosen and beloved, and the day of their lives will be ended, and the day of their error will, from that time on, not be counted." 5. And in those days the angels will assemble, and turn their heads toward the east, towards the people of Parthia and Media, in order to excite the kings, and that a spirit of disturbance come over them, and disturb them from off their thrones, that they come forth from their resting places like lions, and like hungry wolves amidst their flocks. 6. And they will ascend and step upon the land of their chosen, and the land of his chosen will be before them a threshing-floor and a path. 7. But the city of my just will be a hindrance to their horses, and they will take up a battle amongst themselves, and their right will become strong against themselves, and a man will not know his neighbor or his brother, nor the son his father or his mother, until there shall be sufficient bodies by their death and their punishment over them,-it will not be in vain. 8. And in those days the mouth of Sheol will be opened, and they will sink into it; and their destruction, Sheol, will devour the sinners from the presence of the chosen.
    CHAP. 57.-And it came to pass after this that I saw again a host of wagons, upon which men were riding, and they came upon the wind from the east and from the west to the south.
2. And the noise of their wagons was heard, and as this commotion took place, the holy ones from heaven noticed it; and the pillars of the earth were moved from their place, and it was heard from the ends of the earth to the ends of the heavens in ONE day. 3. And they will all fall down and bend the knee before the Lord of the spirits. And this is the end of the second Parable.
    CHAP. 45, 1. With this chapter commences the most interesting and most important part of the whole book, the second parable, which extends to chapter 57, and gives an account of the Messiah,-his person, his judgment, with its consequences for both righteous and unrighteous. The first verse, which is manifestly intended as a superscription, has been the cause of some trouble, as it does not seem to indicate the contents of the parable, and Drummond, p. 63, has made use of this apparent discrepancy for his curious theory of interpolation. Yet a proper understanding of the word concerning will probably clear up the matter. The original word is dîba, and is a preposition very frequently used in an adversative and inimical sense, like GTR, adversus, contra, in. It is so used in our own book 10:9; 56:7, and often in the Ethiopic version of the Bible,
e.g. Ex. xvii. 3; Num. xvi. 3; Deut. xv. 9; Ps. xiv. 4; Ezek. xxxii. 9, 10; Matt. xii. 32; xxiv. 7; Acts xxiii. 5, 30; Mark iii. 29, etc; cf. Dillmann, Lexicon Aethiopico-Latin. col. 1104, and Aethiopis. Gramm. p. 313. The author does not so much desire to give a description of the unhappy fate of the unjust, but rather in a general manner directs his polemics against those who will not believe in a Messianic rule and judgment; it is his defense of HTR against those who accept only HTR. That this object as stated here is in strict conformity with the contents of the parable is apparent at first glance.-2. Cf. notes on 38:1; 41:2.-3. Chosen One, the most frequent name of the Messiah in the Parables; cf. note on 40:5. Throne of glory, 51:3; 62:1-9; 69:27-29, also throne of God, 47:3; 55:4; 62:1-9. In the first part God himself is judge, but here it is the Messiah, 51:3; 55:4; 69:27; but according to 47:3; 62:2 it may seem as if God himself will judge. The difficulty is solved in 69:27, where we learn that although God is in reality the judge he has empowered the Messiah to act in his name; what is done by God's deputy is virtually done by himself; cf. note on 10:7. Choose, cf. note on 41:1. Without number, 39:6; probably to indicate that many shall enjoy this happy time. Strong, i.e. hopeful and encouraged because the day of their oppression is over.-4. Cf. notes on 1:2 and 39:1.-5. Heaven and earth changed is a characteristic of the Messianic times portrayed by both the first and this part of Enoch, based on Isa. lxv.

17 and lxvi. 2; cf. 2 Pet. iii. 13; Apoc. xxi. 1. This kingdom is to be established on earth, probably in Palestine; cf. chap. 56. His idea of this kingdom is one with a visible prince, although, unlike some of the later prophets, he does not find this prince in the house of David.
CHAP. 46. The following is largely based on Dan. vii., and the Ancient of days becomes here the Head
of days, 47:3; 48:2; 55:1; (60:2;) 71:10, 12, 13, and is consequently peculiar to the Parables. He is called thus as the one who was from the beginning, and as in the first parable the eyes of the seer are mainly directed to the completed Messianic kingdom, and not to its process of development, the omission of this designation of God in that portion is easily understood. White, cf. Dan. vii. 9. With this Ancient of days there is joined, as in Dan. vii. 13, one who is like a son of man (not like the son of man, as the Authorized Version gives it). Whatever may be the true interpretation of Daniel's expression, be it the personality of the Messiah, or be it the ideal Israel, it is certain that our author, perhaps from Ps. cx. 1, understood by that difficult clause a certain person, and that person was the Messiah. Son of man the Messiah is frequently called in the Parables; cf. 46:2, 3, 4; 48:2; 62:7, 9, 14; 63:11; 69:26, 27; 70:1; 71:17. His countenance is like an angel's; cf. 1 Sam.
xxix. 9; Tob. v. 5, 11, 14; Acts vi. 15; Gal. iv. 14; Col. ii. 18.-2. As Daniel, vii. 16, asks for an explanation of his mysterious vision Enoch here asks his guide; cf. note on 40:2.-3. As his chief office is that of a judge, his most important attribute is that of justice; he is idealized justice, for he possesses it as his own, and abides with it, based on passages like Isa. ix. 6; xi. 3-5; Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; xxxiii. 15; Isa. liii. 11; Zech. ix. 9; Ps. xlv. 4-8; lxxii. In this capacity as just judge he will reveal all the treasures of secrecy, a clause primarily referring to the fact that he will know all secrets so as to judge aright, but manifestly here used as referring to everything that his coming will reveal, but which is unknown at present. Chosen, cf. note on 40:5; he does not, then, hold his office by any right of his own, but God has chosen him, 51:3.-4. Overcomes; none shall be superior to him, or be able to oppose him; cf. 48:5; 49:1, 2; 51:4, etc.-5. Having received such a destiny from God, even the mighty of this earth (against whom the author is continually directing his polemics) shall be overcome. The idea of a last attack and defeat of the combined enemies of the new kingdom, an idea based on statements in Ezekiel and Daniel, and promulgated by many apocryphal writers, and also by the writer of the first part in 90:16, does not lie in this or the following verses, nor in 52:4-9, but these rather picture the effect of the Messianic judgment on these sinners, and any other interpretation would not be in harmony with the strictly forensic character of this judgment as taught in the Parables; cf. note on 41:1, and Schürer, p. 587; cf. Isa. xiv. 9, 11; Job xvii. 13, 14. Bonds, cf. Ps. cvii. 14; cxvi. 16; Jer. ii. 20; xxx. 8; Nahum I. 13. Teeth, cf. Ps. iii. 7; lviii. 6; Lam. iii. 16. Their sin is again the one that is here so frequently condemned, that of unbelief, which here, according to the subjects, takes the form of ingratitude and unwillingness to acknowledge the source of power; cf. Sap. vi. 2; Rom. xiii. 1. But against whom is this sin committed, God or the Messiah? and who is the source of this power? It would be strange if it were the latter person, and as in verses 6, 7, and 8 this unbelief is directed against God, we are constrained to believe that the him after exalt, and the he implied in whence is God and not the Messiah. Then he will expel, from 47:3; 62:2, would also indicate God as the subject, for it seems as if the Messiah is to have the purely forensic part of the judgment, but the punishment is inflicted either by God or through the agency of his angels.-6. Darkness, cf. note on 10:5. Worms, cf. Job
xvii. 14; xxi. 26; Isa. xiv. 11.-7. Stars, cf. Dan. viii. 10, 11, 13, 25; En. 43:4. Riches, cf. Ps. xlix. 6; lii. 7.-8.
Houses, for which in 53:6 we have the singular.
CHAP. 47, 1. As the following verse shows, the just one here and verse 4 is used collectively for the just.
-2. The angels petition for men; cf. note on 15:1, 2.-3. Books of the living, cf. Ex. xxxii. 32 sq; Ps. lxix. 29; Mal. iii. 16; Isa. iv. 3; Dan. xii. 1; Book of Jubilees c. 30, and En. 103:2; 104:1, and are probably the same as the books mentioned 89:61-64, 68, 70, 71, 76, 77; 90:17, 20; 98:7, 8; 104:7; cf. Harnack's note on Pastor Hermae, Vis. 1, 3, 2. As judgment is to be passed over both good and bad, the author evidently pictured these books of life as containing the lives of all to be judged. Host; in Dan. vii. 10 God has his host with him in the judgment; cf. note on 1:4. Although God is here and elsewhere present at the judgment, it is not said that he judges; but other passages show that this function was assigned to the Messiah. Cf. note on 45:4.-4. Number; the words eternity, vs. 2, and demanded here show that the number signifies the number of years

which God had determined should pass before the judgment should be held; cf. 18:16.
    CHAP. 48, 1. Having just mentioned the justice that characterizes the judge and the judgment, he now states that justice or righteousness, the lack of which on earth he so deplores, will be given in abundance to the saints. This justice, 39:5; 91:10, they shall drink from a fountain, and from fountains of wisdom; cf. Prov.
xvi. 22; Sir. I. 5; Bar. iii. 12; 4 Ezra xiv. 28, and in general Isa. lv. 1. Place, cf 46:1.-2. At that hour, i.e. at the
time when Enoch was seeing and hearing these things.-3. Almost the very words here are found also Targum Jonath. on Zech. iv. 7. There can be no doubt of the fact that the writer here as in Targum Jonath. on Isa. ix. 6; Mic. v. 1 plainly teaches the pre-existence of the Messiah. In verse 6 he existed before the world was created, and will continue to be to eternity, and in 62:7 he has been hidden, but revealed to the just; cf. 69:26, and Targum Jonath. on Mic. iv. 8; and in 70:1 this pre-existence is presupposed. This idea the author beyond all doubt develops from Dan. vii. 13 sqq. and Mic. v. 1 (in the Heb.). Gfrörer (cf. Drummond, p. 290) sees the pre-existence of the Messiah taught in the LXX on Ps. lxxi. 5; cix. 3; Isa. ix. 6, but with doubtful results. A more successful appeal, however, can be made to 3 Sibyl. 186 sqq. and to 4 Ezra xii. 32; xiii. 26; cf. Schürer, p. 584; cf. also Prov. viii. 22-30; Sir. I. 4; xxiv. 9. Signs, of course those of heaven, the astronomical; cf. 8:3; 72:13, 19, and Gen. I. 14; Jer. x. 2; Epist. Jer. 67.-4. This Messiah is to be the light of the nations; cf. Jer. xlii. 6; xlix. 6; 3 Sibyl. 710-726. The blessings in store are, then, by no means restricted to the people of Israel.-5. All will acknowledge him, 10:21; (53:1;) 90:33-38, even his enemies, 62:6, 9, 10, and chap. 63. Cf. what is said Isa. xlix. 22; lx. 4, 9; lxvi. 20; Psalt. Salom. xvii. But as this Messiah is such only by God's will, their praise ultimately seeks him as its object.-6. For this purpose, i.e. for the one just stated. Was chosen, in explanation of his name as the Chosen One. Hidden, 62:7, 8, exactly as in 4 Ezra xiii. 52. This Messiah, being pre-existent, shall also abide to eternity.-7. Although hidden from the world the Messiah was revealed to the just in order that their portion may not fail them; they received the revelation that they might remain firm in their trials, and not miss their final blessedness. God revealed him through wisdom, 62:7,
i.e. through the revealed wisdom of the prophets.-8. But he that brings happiness to the faithful has punishment for their oppressors; cf. 46:4-8. Day of terror, i.e. day of judgment. Will not be saved, as the opposite of the saved in verse 7; cf. Job v. 4; Ps. vii. 2; lxxi. 11; Isa. xlii. 22.-9. Put, cf. 38:5, and in 50:2 they will conquer. This appears to indicate a final struggle before the real inauguration of the judgment, for according to 50:3, 4 some will then repent. But the great punishment is by fire; cf. Ex. xv. 10 and 7; Isa. v. 24; xlvii. 14; Obad. xviii. Or could not the chosen here possibly refer to the angels of punishment (cf. 53:3), who throughout the Parables are the punishers of these kings? The name chosen does not speak against this idea, as these angels are beyond all doubt under the rule of God, and have been selected and chosen for this special office.-10. Rest, cf. 53:7; 62:13. Before him, i.e. before the Messiah. Fall, as opposite of verse 4; cf. Ps. xxxvi. 12. Denied the Lord and his Anointed is taken from Ps. ii. 2. Anointed, found also 52:4; Apoc. Baruch
xxix. 3; xxx. 1; xxxix. 7; XL. 1; lxx. 9; lxxii. 2; 4 Ezra vii. 28, 29; (according to the Arabic and Arm.) xii. 32; and in Psalt. Salom. xvii. 36 and xviii. 6, 8 GTR (or rather it should be GTR).
CHAP. 49. The ability to effect all this lies in the nature of the Messiah. On 1 cf. Isa. xi. 9, 10. For
connects with the previous, and thus the verse is to show the reason for the statements just made. Wisdom, in the sense of knowledge and fear of God; cf. 37, 2.-2. Secrets of justice, in explanation of which in verse 4 it is stated that he will judge the secrets; cf. Isa. xi. 2. As shadow flees when light arrives thus injustice disappears when the Messiah, who is justice itself, vs. 3, appears; cf. Job xiv. 2. Has arisen, cf. Mic. v. 2. Eternity, cf. Isa. ix. 5, 6; Mic. v. 3.-3. This verse is shaped after Isa. xi. 2, and the connection points to the interpretation of the clause, those asleep in justice, as referring to the spirits of the prophets, concretely used for the spirit of prophecy; cf. Langen, p. 45.-4. Cf. Isa. xi. 3, 4.
    CHAP. 50. The state of affairs will be entirely changed when the Messiah comes: the exalted shall be humiliated, and the humble exalted. The political aspects of the Messianic kingdom will be the reverse of the present. Light of days, i.e. daylight, explained well 58:5, 6. For the just the rule of the unjust had been night; cf. Ps. cxxxix. 11.-2. In addition to this political change there will be punishment in store for the wicked. Day of trouble, usually employed only of the day of final judgment, could possibly refer to a last struggle; cf.

note on 48:9. That the final judgment is not meant is clear, for the day of grace is not yet over, and the others will repent. Who the others are is uncertain (except, indeed, that they are sinners), for it is uncertain whether the contest is to be between the faithful and the renegades, or between the former and the heathen nations. If it is allowed to use 90:30, 33, 34; 91:14, the former would be the case, and the others would be the hitherto neutral heathens.-3. But as these others did not endure the trials of the faithful their position in the Messiah's kingdom will not be as honorable. How could a Christian with Matt. xx. 1 sqq. before him have written these words? His name, i.e. God's.-4. Although God is merciful he is also just, and therefore all who do not repent in the time of grace will be destroyed. It seems, then, that the Messianic kingdom is not to come all of a sudden, but shall undergo a certain development.
    CHAP. 51, 1. The resurrection of the dead, first plainly announced by Dan. xii. 2, is to the author a universal one, thus agreeing with 2 Macc. vii. 9, 14, 23, 36; xii. 43, 44; Psalt. Salom. iii. 16; xiv. 2; Josephus,
Antiqq. xviii. 1, 3; Bel. Jud. ii. 8, 14; Baruch xxx. 1-5; l. 1-li. 6; 4 Ezra vii. 32. The first part of Enoch clearly
teaches the resurrection of the just (cf. notes on 22:12, 13), but also that certain sinners shall not rise, while here the writer says that earth, Sheol, and hell will return their contents. The Old Testament idea of Sheol is here split into two notions-a place of departed spirits and of hell. The original of the latter term is haguel,
i.e. destruction, and is consequently the same as the Abaddon used by the Old Testament as synonymous with Sheol, e.g. Job xxvi. 6; xxviii. 22; Prov. xv. 11. But then it is possible that the word hell here has been added by the translator, as hell, the place of fiery torment, is, according to both Part I. and the Parables, uninhabited until after the judgment. The passage 61:5 does not contradict the idea of a universal resurrection. Whether the bodies will rise with the souls is not said, but seems probable from the use of the word earth. -2. Out of this multitude he (i.e. the Messiah) will chose his holy ones. The wording is adapted to the forensic character of the judgment.-3. Wisdom, cf. note on 49:1, 3. This verse is to characterize him as regent and potentate, a role he is to assume after the judgment is over. The just will be the recipients of this wisdom, 48:1; 49:1; 61:7, 11. Here again it is said that he has these powers only as a gift of God.-4. Skip, cf. Ps. cxiv. 4, 6. The happiness will be like that of the heavenly angels; cf. 104:4, 6.-5. Cf. Ps. xxxvii. 3, 9, 11, 29, 34.
    CHAP. 52, 1. He is for the present done with the Messianic kingdom as such, but still desires to give some facts concerning it that could not well have been interwoven in the above, and with this partial change of subjects the scene of observation is somewhat shifted towards the west. He is carried to his destination by the wind, according to the sentiments of both authors; cf. 14:8 and 39:3. At that place, i.e. from heaven, for there he was.-2. The metal hills belong to the secrets of heaven, i.e. it is known only in heaven that hills which now, indeed, have no existence shall exist in the Messianic times. Soft metal, or flowing metal; Dillmann has Tropfmetal, but just what is meant is uncertain; but cf. 65:7, 8. Hoffmann thought of quicksilver, but Dillmann rightly opposes this idea.-3. In secret, I, and no one else.-4. The application of the allegory and object of the metallic hills follows. They are for the benefit of the Anointed; but not for the increase of his power and wealth, as 6-9 exegetically explain. Anointed, 48:10.-5. Patience is enjoined on Enoch that he may learn still more secrets; a promise which is fulfilled in chap. 53 sqq.-6 Now follows the true object of these mountains. They are symbolical of the enemies of the Messiah, and his power will be shown by their complete disappearance. The term mountains probably plays on the fact that the chief offenders in the Parables are the mighty of the earth. These mountains will melt; cf. Mic. I. 3; Ps. xcvii. 5, and like water that flows, cf. Mic. I. 4, and become weak that they cannot stand in his presence.-7. Therefore, too, these metals will have no value to save in the time of the Messiah, as the judgment then will be according to other standards; cf. Zeph. I. 18; Ezek. vii. 19; Ps. xlix. 7-10; Jer. iv. 30; Isa. xiii. 7. Flee; it will be impossible to escape justice by buying the judge.-8. Nor will the coarser metals be of any value whatever in defense against this judgment; no human weapons of defense can ward off the sure destruction.-9. In plain words says the author, these instruments of war will disappear when the prince of peace arrives; cf. Hos. ii. 20; Isa. ii. 4; ix. 6; Zech. ix. 10; Ps. xlvi. 10; Mic. v. 9.

    CHAP. 53. In beginning a second parabolical sketch Enoch says he saw a deep valley whose mouth was open, to which all mankind bring offerings. These presents are, to judge from 63:10; 98:10; 94:7; 97:7-10, brought to buy release from the judgment of the Messiah, the author connecting this thought with 52:7. The term valley is chosen only to show the vast amount of presents brought. Him i.e. the Messiah. Not full, do not suffice.-2. They shows that the subject in verse 1 must be restricted to the sinners. The reason these presents cannot be received is because their givers are criminal, and therefore, in spite of their offerings they will be destroyed. They make i.e. what the just make, for only thus can the clause be intelligently understood. Cf. note on 38:1.-3. Angels of punishment, a name mentioned here for the first time, but found also 56:1; 62:11; 63:1; (66:1). As in 53:5, and in nearly all these passages (with the possible exception of 56:1), these angels are preparing to punish the kings and the powerful. Cf. 46:4. It seems that the author, who states that the fallen angels as special sinners had special tormentors in the higher angels, 54:6, conceived that the mighty of this earth should find their special tormentors in the persons of these angels of punishment. They are in the service of Satan (cf. note on 40:7), and may possibly be identical with the satans, cf. Dillmann, p. 147.-6. House, cf. 38-39 and 46:8.-7. All things shall be changed, is probably the meaning of this verse. Cf. Isa. xxix. 17; xxx. 25; xl. 4. It is highly probable that the author, on the basis of Ezek. xl.-xlviii.; Isa. liv. 11 sqq.; lx.; Hag. ii. 7-9; Zech. ii. 6-17, thinks of the new Jerusalem to be brought down from heaven, although he nowhere, except possibly in chap. 56, definitely states that the Messianic kingdom shall have its centre in Jerusalem. Cf. Schürer, p. 588 and En. 56:6; 61.
    CHAP. 54. In the third sketch he sees the execution of the judgment. This valley with the burning fire is hell. It is not the valley of Hinnom; cf. notes on 27:1 sqq. and 38:1.-3. Instruments, cf. 53:3, intended for Azazel and his host, for the for them in vs. 2 refers forward and backward.-5. The Messiah is also judge of the angels, 55:4; 90:24. This is their final punishment, after the temporal one described chap. 10.-6. As the expression oven of fire shows, these verses refer not to the first, but to the final judgment. The same sin that occasioned the temporal will also occasion the final punishment, and the same agents will inflict both; cf. 40:7.-7. With this verse commences an interpolation, and ends at 55:2. It is one of the Noachic fragments; cf. Introd. The occasion of its introduction was the mention made of the fallen angels just previous. It treats of the deluge. The designation of the waters above as masculine and the waters below as feminine is altogether unlike the sentiments in either of the two main parts, but suits the gnostically tainted ideas of this fragmentist; cf. 60:7, 8, 16.-10. Interpreting they as referring to men gives the best sense.
    CHAP. 55. As we have positive evidence, 68:1, that the Noachic fragmentist made use of the Parables, we can understand why he here changes the subject in Gen. viii. 21, and uses the term Head of days instead of God.-2. The sign is, of course, the rainbow.-3. This continues the account of 54:6, and therefore angel is here collectively used.-4. To increase the torments of the punishment the kings must first behold the terrors of the fallen angels, as these had to see the death of their own children, 10:12. If he judges the angels and overpowers them, how much more easily will the kings of the earth be punished by him?
    CHAP. 56. Angels of punishment, cf. note on 53:3, from which it also appears that those here punished are the kings themselves, for that their turn is next follows from chap. 55. There, cf. 54:3, 1.-3. The chosen and beloved of these angels are then probably the mighty kings, as it would be too extravagant to suppose that all the sinners were to be bound by special officers.-4. Will not be counted, because they have ended.-5. This verse is important as it may furnish an historical hint as to the time when the Parables were written. The whole description is certainly prophetical, and pictures the last struggle of the new kingdom with its enemies, on the basis of passages like Joel iv.; Zech. xii. and xiv.; Ezek. xxxviii. and xxxix. In summoning up these enemies as Parthians and Medes, the author indicates that he regarded these as dangerous to the new Israel, but whether the basis of his prophecy is a concrete case, the invasion of Palestine by the Parthians about 40 B.C., mentioned by Joseph. Antiqq. xiv. 13; Bel. Jud. I. 13 must, as the statements are so very vague, remain doubtful. Hilgenfeld strangely finds here an indication of the belief that Nero would return from the east! Lions, symbol of strength and bravery, Judges xiv. 18; 2 Sam. I. 23; xvii. 10; Prov. xxviii. 1; xxx. 30; wolf, symbol of a robbing disposition, Gen. xlix. 27;  Ezek. xxii. 27; Zeph. iii. 3; Hab. I. 8. He avoids an

anthropomorphism by substituting the angels in the place of God, as it stands in Isa. xix. 2 sqq.; Ezek. xxxviii., xxxix; cf. Zech. vi. 1-8; Dan. x. 13, 14, 20, 21; xi. 1, 2; xii. 1. The motive that prompted this change was probably the idea that God who had established the new kingdom through his Chosen One could not aid in its embarrassment. This passage makes it probable that Palestine is to be the country where the Messianic kingdom will be established. Threshing-floor, partly from Isa. xxi. 10. Cf. Isa. xli. 15; Jer. li. 33; Mic. iv. 12 sq.; Amos I. 3.-7. But the attempt will fail, Zech. xii. 2, 3, and revolution will break out among themselves, Ezek.
xxxviii. 21; Zech. xiv. 13; Hag. ii. 22. The ties of relationship are disregarded, Isa. iii. 5; ix. 19, 21. Sufficient,
i.e. for the satisfaction of justice. Opened, Num. xvi. 31 sqq.; Isa. v. 14.
    CHAP. 57. The result of this repulse is of importance for the new kingdom, for all the nations, Isa. xiv. 1; xliv. 6; lv. 5; lvi. 3 sqq.; Zech. viii. 21 sqq.; Ezek. xlvii. 22 sqq., (and not simply scattered Israel, Dillmann) come to take part in it. That it must be taken in this wide sense is apparent from vs. 3, where all worship him, an expression used in other parts of the book for the coming of the heathens. And then too it is a suitable ending for this important Parable. Came upon the wind indicates their eager longings and haste; cf. Isa. v. 28; Jer. iv. 13; Ezek. x. 13.-2. Cf. Hag. ii. 6, 7; Zech. I. 11 sqq.; Isa. xxvii. 13; xliii. 5, 6; xlix. 12, 13, 22, 23; xxiv.
18; Ps. lxxxii. 5; Prov. viii. 29.

SECTION IX.

   CHAP. 58.- And I began to speak the third Parable concerning the just and concerning the chosen. 2. Blessed are ye, the just and chosen, for your portion is glorious! 3. And the just will be in the light of the sun, and the chosen in the light of everlasting life; and there will be no end to the days of their life, and the days of the holy will be without number. 4. And they will seek the light and will find justice with the Lord of the spirits; there will be peace to the just with the Lord of the world. 5. And after that it will be said to the holy, that they should seek in heaven the secrets of justice, the portion of faith [fidelity], for it has risen like the sun on the earth, and darkness has disappeared. 6. And there will be an unceasing light, and in the number of days they will not enter, because darkness will be destroyed first, and the light will be mighty before the Lord of the spirits, and the light of rectitude will be strong in eternity before the Lord of the spirits.
   CHAP. 59.-And in those days my eyes saw the secrets of the lightning, and the masses of light, and their judgments; and they flashed for a blessing and for a curse, as the Lord of the spirits desired. 2. And there I saw the secrets of the thunder, and how when it resounds above in the heavens its sound is heard; and they showed me the dwelling-places of the earth, and the thunder, either for peace or a blessing or for a curse, according to the word of the Lord of the spirits. 3. And after that all the secrets of the luminaries and of the lightning were shown to me, as they flash for a blessing and for satisfaction.
    CHAP. 58. 1. As the author states himself, this chapter commences the third Parable. This extends to chap. 71, with the exception of 60 and 65:1-69:25, which are Noachic interpolations; cf. Introd. The Parable is to treat, at least mainly, of the blessedness of the chosen and the just. Intimately connected with this is the description of the judgment with its consequences for the wicked, and therefore he treats these topics also. I began to speak, as in 37:2.-2. In contradistinction from the curse pronounced on the wicked, the just will have a blessed portion.-3. Light, cf. note on 38:4. Everlasting life, cf. note on 37:4. Without number, i.e. numberless.-4. But light is their element, therefore they seek it, 50:1. They will also seek justice, as the Messiah is personified justice; cf. 48:1; 46:3. Lord of the world, cf. note on 1:3.-5. The secrets of justice in

heaven, 49:2; 51:3, i.e. the glorious lot stored up in heaven by the just judge, and realized only in the Messianic times, but before that hidden to the world; cf. note on 49:2. Faith, cf. 39:6; 46:8; 61:4. As denying, 41:2, is the cardinal sin of the wicked, its opposite-belief, faith, or trust in God's promises during the period of the sinners' rule-is the most shining virtue of the just. We need not go to the New Testament for the origin and use of this word. It has risen, in general terms, like it has become light. -6. As this state is permanent, and not transitory, no one will attempt to number the days.
    CHAP. 59. 1. As he has repeatedly done before, the author has interwoven here brief remarks on the secrets of the physical world. His statements rest on Job xxxvi. 30-37; v. 13; xxxviii. 24-27. Their judgment, not in the sense that they are to be judged, but rather that they are instruments in the hands of God to effect judgment when they flash for a curse or a blessing. His object is, then, to give here the moral object of these phenomena of whose origin he has spoken above, chap. 41.-2. Cf. Job xxxvii. 1-5. Enoch, being in heaven, is now allowed to see the dwellings of men, as these are affected by what he sees in heaven; cf. Job xxxvii. 13. This is all further explained in the Noachic fragment, 60:13-15.-3. Cf. 41:8; Job xxxviii. 24-27.


SECTION X.

   CHAP. 60.-In the year five-hundred, and in the seventh month, on the fourteenth day of the month, of the life of Enoch. In that Parable I saw that the heaven of heavens shook tremendously, and the host of the Most High, and the angels, a thousand times thousand, and ten thousand times ten thousand, were disturbed exceedingly. 2. And then I saw the Head of days sitting upon the throne of his glory, and the angels and the just ones stood around him. 3. And a great trembling took hold of me, and fear seized me; my loins were bent and were loosened, and my whole being melted together, and I fell down on my face.
4. And the holy Michael sent another holy angel, one of the holy angels, and he raised me up. And as he raised me my spirit returned, for I had not been able to endure the sight of this host and of that trembling and shaking of heaven. 5. And the holy Michael said to me: "On account of what vision is such trembling? Up to to-day was the day of his mercy, and he was merciful and slow to anger over those who dwell on the earth. 6. But when the day and the power and the punishments and judgments come, which the Lord of the spirits has prepared for those who bow to the judgment of justice, and for those who deny the judgment of justice, and for those who take his name in vain-that day has been prepared a covenant for the chosen, and a test for the sinners. 7. And on that day two monsters will be distributed, a female monster, named Leviathan, to dwell in the depth of the sea, over the fountains of the waters. 8. But the masculine is named Behemoth, who occupies, with his breast, a void desert called Dêndâin, in the east of the garden where the chosen and holy will dwell, where my grandfather was taken up, the seventh from Adam, the first of men whom the Lord of the spirits made. 9. And I asked that other angel that he should show me the power of those monsters, how they were separated on ONE day, and that one descended into the depths of the sea and the other to the desert land. 10. And he said to me: "Thou son of man, thou desirest to know here that which is a secret." 11. Then the other angel, who went with me, spoke to me, and showed me that which was secret, the first and the last, what is in the heavens on high, and in the earth in the deep, and on the ends of the heavens, and on the foundations of heaven, and in the repositories of the winds;  12. And how the spirits are

divided, and how weighing is done, and how the fountains and the winds are counted according to the power of the spirit, and the power of the lights of the moon, and that is it a power of justice, and the divisions of the stars according to their names, and how each division is divided; 13. and peals of thunder according to the places where they fall, and all the divisions that are made among the flashes of lightning that lightning may take place, and their hosts obey. 14. For the thunder has places of rest for the awaiting of its peal, and thunder and lightning are inseparable, and although not one, both go together through the spirit and are not separated. 15. For when the lightning flashes, the thunder utters its voice, and the spirit causes a rest during the flash, and divides equally between them, for the treasury of their flashes is like the sand; and each one of them, in its flash, is held with a bridle, and turned back by the power of the spirit, and is pushed forward, according to the number of the directions on the earth. 16. And the spirit of the sea is masculine and strong, and according to the strength of his power, he draws it [i.e. the sea] back with a bridle, and in like manner it is pushed forward, and scattered in all the mountains of the earth. 17. And the spirit of the hoar-frost is his own angel, and the spirit of hail is a good angel. 18. And he has left go the spirit of the snow on account of its strength, and it has a special spirit, and that which ascends from it is like smoke, and its name is frost. 19. And the spirit of the fog is not joined with them in their repositories, but it has a special repository, for its course is in clearness and in light and in darkness and in winter and in summer, and its repository is the light, and it [i.e. the spirit] is its angel. 20. And the spirit of the dew has its dwelling-place at the ends of the heaven, and is connected with the repositories of the rain, and its course is in winter and in summer; and its clouds and the clouds of the fog are connected, and one gives to the other. 21. And when the spirit of rain moves out of its repository the angels come and open the repository, and lead it out, and when it is scattered over all the earth, and also as often as it is joined to the waters of the earth. 22. For the waters are for those who live on the earth; for they are the nourishment for the earth from the Most High, who is in heaven; therefore rain has its measure, and angels receive it. 23. All these things I saw towards the garden of the just. 24. And the angel of peace, who was with me, said to me: "These two monsters are prepared to be fed, according to the greatness of God, that the punishments from God be not in vain, and sons will be killed with their mothers, and children with their fathers. 25. When the punishments from the Lord of the spirits shall rest over them it will rest, so that the punishments from the Lord of the spirits may not come in vain over those; after that there will be a judgment in his mercy and his patience."
   CHAP. 61.-And I saw in those days that long cords were given to those angels, and they took to themselves wings, and flew, and went towards the north. 2. And I asked the angel, saying: "Why have these taken the long cords, and have gone away?" And he said to me: "They went out to measure." 3. And the angel, who went with me, said to me: "These bring the measures of the just and the ropes of the just, that they may support themselves on the name of the Lord of the spirits to all eternity. 4. And the chosen will begin and dwell with the chosen, and these measures will be given to faith [fidelity], and will strengthen the word of justice. 5. And these measures will reveal all the secrets of the depths of the earth, and

those who have been destroyed by the desert, and those who have been devoured by the fish of the sea, and by the beasts, that they return and support themselves on the day of the Chosen One, for none will be destroyed before the Lord of the spirits, and none can be destroyed. 6. And then received a command all who dwell in the heights of heaven, and ONE power, and ONE voice, and ONE light, like the fire, was given to them. 7. And that one first they blessed and exalted and glorified with wisdom, and showed themselves wise in speech and in the spirit of life. 8. And the Lord of the spirits placed his Chosen One on the throne of his glory, and he will judge all the deeds of the holy ones in heaven, and will weigh their deeds on scales. 9. And when he shall raise his countenance to judge their paths that are secret by the word of the name of the Lord of the spirits, and their path in the way of the just judgment of the highest God, then they will all speak with ONE voice, and bless, and praise, and exalt, and glorify the name of the Lord of the spirits. 10. And then will cry out all the host of the heavens, and all the holy ones above, and the host of God, Cherubim and Seraphim and Ophanim, and all the angels of power, and all the angels of supremacies, and the Chosen One, and the other powers on the earth, above the water, on that day; 11. and will raise ONE voice, and will bless, and glorify, and praise, and exalt, in the spirit of faith [fidelity], and in the spirit of wisdom and of patience, and in the spirit of mercy, and in the spirit of judgment and of peace, and in the spirit of goodness, and will all say with ONE voice; 'Blessed is he, and blessed be the name of the Lord of the spirits, in eternity, and to eternity.'
12. And all who do not sleep in high heavens will bless him; all his holy ones, who are in
heaven, will bless him, and all the chosen, who dwell in the garden of life, and every spirit of light, who is able to bless, and glorify, and exalt, and say: 'Holy,' to thy sacred name, and all flesh, which will exceedingly praise and bless thy name to all eternity. 13. For great is the mercy of the Lord of the spirits, and he is slow to anger, and all his doing, and all his power, as much as he has made, he has revealed to the just and to the chosen, in the name of the Lord of the spirits.
   CHAP. 62.- And thus the Lord commanded the kings and the powerful and the exalted and those who dwell on the earth, and said; "Open your eyes, and lift up your horns, if ye are able to recognize the Chosen One." 2. And the Lord of the spirits sat on the throne of his glory, and the spirit of justice was poured out over him, and the word of his mouth slew all the sinners and all the impious, and they were destroyed before his face. 3. Then will stand up on that day all the kings and the powerful and the exalted and those who hold the earth, and will see him and will know that he sits on the throne of his glory, and that the just are judged in justice before him, and that there is no word spoken in vain before him. 4. And pain will come over them, like a woman who is in travail, and to whom the birth is hard, when the son enters the mouth of the mother, and she has pain in giving birth. 5. And one portion of them will look upon the other, and will tremble and cast down their countenances, and pain will seize them, when they see this Son of the woman sitting on the throne of his glory. 6. And the powerful kings, and all who hold the earth, will honor, and bless, and exalt him who rules over all, who was hidden. 7. For formerly the Son of man was hidden, and the Most High preserved him before his power, and has revealed him to the chosen. 8. And the

congregation of the holy and the chosen will be sown, and all the chosen will stand before him on that day. 9. And all the powerful kings and the exalted and they who rule the earth will fall before him upon their faces, and will worship and will hope in this Son of man, and will petition him and ask him for mercy. 10. And that Lord of the spirits will only press them, that they hasten to leave his presence and their countenances will be filled with shame, and darkness will be heaped upon their countenances. 11. And the angels of punishment will receive them to take vengeance on them, because they have abused his children and his chosen. 12. And they will be a spectacle for the just and for his chosen; they will rejoice over them, because the wrath of the Lord of the spirits rests upon them, and the sword of the Lord of the spirits is drunk with them. 13. And the just and chosen will be saved on that day, and will henceforth not see the face of the sinners and of the unjust. 14. And the Lord of the spirits will dwell over them, and they will dwell with this Son of man, and will eat and lie down and rise again with him to all eternity. 15. And the just and the chosen will have risen from the earth, and will have ceased to cast down their faces, and will be clothed with the garments of life. 16. And these will be the garments of life before the Lord of the spirits; and your garments will not become old, and your glory will not decrease before the Lord of the spirits.
   CHAP. 63.-And in those days the powerful kings, who hold the earth, will petition the angels of punishment, to whom they are delivered, that they should give them a little rest, so that they could fall down and worship before the Lord of the spirits, and could acknowledge their sins before him. 2. And they will bless and glorify the Lord of the spirits, and will say: "Blessed is the Lord of the spirits, and the Lord of kings, the Lord of the powerful, and the Lord of the rulers, and the Lord of glory, and the Lord of wisdom, and every secret is clear. 3. And thy power is to all generations, and thy glory to all eternity: deep are thy secrets all and without number, and thy justice without reckoning. 4. Now we know that we should praise and bless the Lord of kings, and him who rules over all the kings." 5. And they will say: "Who will give us rest, that we might praise and thank and bless him, and be believers before his glory? 6. And now we long for a little rest, and do not find it; we are driven away, and do not receive it; the light has ceased before us, and darkness is our dwelling-place to all eternity. 7. For before him we have not believed, and have not honored the name of the Lord of the kings, and we have not praised the Lord in all his doing, and our hope was in the sceptre of our kingdom and in our glory. 8. And in the day of our trial and our trouble he did not save us, and we do not find rest to believe that our Lord is faithful in all his deeds and in all his judgments and his justice, and that his judgment does not respect persons. 9. And we shall disappear before his face on account of our deeds, and all our sins are counted in justice." 10. Now they will say to them: "Our souls are satisfied with unjust goods, but it does not prevent our going to the flames of the pain of hell." 11. And after that their countenances will be filled with darkness and shame before that Son of man, and they will be expelled from his presence, and a sword will dwell in their midst before his countenance. 12. And thus said the Lord of the spirits: "This is the ordinance and judgment of the mighty and the kings and the exalted and those who hold the earth before the Lord

of the spirits."
   CHAP. 64.-And I saw other faces in that place in secret. 2. I heard the voice of the angel saying: "These are the angels who descended from heaven upon the earth, and have revealed to the children of men that which was secret, and have led astray the sons of men that they committed sin."

    CHAP. 60. 1. This whole chapter is one of the Noachic fragments, as is shown by the contents, cf. Introd. The date being given here points to a new author; as in the other portions there is never the least hint given as to the time when the vision was received, except in an indefinite way in 83:2 and 85:3, and as the verse is, beyond all doubt, constructed after Gen. v. 32, and Noah, not Enoch, is the recipient of the vision in the following; and as the contents point to the time of its reception after the death of Enoch, it is an absolute certainty that for life of Enoch we should read life of Noah. Its introduction here can be explained by the fact that Noah as well as Enoch received revelations, Gen. vi. 13, and its object was probably to supplement the brief statements of the rest of the book concerning the first judgment, as the second had received such a minute description. All these additions treat of the flood. Parable, i.e. the following vision. The effort of the interpolator to connect his fragments with the Parables is also clear from 68:1. Shaking of the heavens is a sign of a coming revelation of judgment, 1:9; 14:22; 40:1; 71:8, 13. Host, cf. note on 1:9.-2. Head of days, in imitation of the Parables, cf. 55:1, as is also the sitting on the throne of glory, as a sign of judgment, cf. 47:3 and passim. By remarking that the just ones stand around the throne the fragmentist blends the two judgments into one, unless, indeed, he understands by the just ones the patriarchs who had died before the time of the deluge. It is scarcely possible that he would have used the word as synonymous with angels.-3. Cf. 14:13; 14:24. Loins, cf. Isa. xlv. 1; Ps. lxix. 23.-4. Cf. Dan. viii. 17 sqq.; x. 9, 10. Michael here is the first and highest angel, strictly in accordance with 40:4, and not like 20:5, where he is fourth in rank. As one to whom almost divine attributes are ascribed, 40:9, he does not raise Noah himself, but sends another angel, whose occupation is similar to that of the angel of peace (vs. 24) in the Parables; cf. note on 40:2.-6. Power, because the day of the deluge will develop God's power. After the manner of 37-71, mankind is divided into two classes, those who bow to, i.e. believe in, the judgment and those who deny it. The writer here clearly adapts the description of the second judgment in the Parables to the first.-7, 8. This judgment shall consist in a flood, as is shown by the mention of the two monsters, Behemoth and Leviathan, of Job XL. and xli., and are also, according to Jewish interpreters, to be found in Gen. I. 21; Ps. XL. 10; Isa. xxvii. 1. On this strange fancy of later Judaism, cf. Drummond, p. 352 sqq. As they are male and female, and at least one of them dwells in the water, it is probable that they are in some way connected with the masculine and feminine water of 54:8, perhaps personifications of the destructive elements in the waters above and below; cf. verse
24. On the subterranean fountains, cf. Gen. vii. 11; Job xxxviii. 16. Dendain HTR "the judgement of a judge," is probably a fictitious place, cf. 10:4. The garden is, of course, Eden. It is very strange that the desert should be in this garden. Probably better, to the east of the garden, as the preposition ba is frequently used in the sense of ad, apud, juxta, cf. Dillmann, Lex., col. 478. Whether the souls of the departed saints shall dwell there from their death to the last judgment, or after that, is not clear, although the former is the more probable; cf. 70:3. Enoch was in reality the great-grandfather of Noah, but cf. 65:2, 5, 9; 67:4; 68:1. Taken up, cf. Dillmann, ad loc. Seventh from Adam, cf. Jude 14.-9. That other angel, cf. vs. 4. How, in the sense of why. -10. Son of man, the mysterious name with which Ezekiel is constantly addressed; cf. En. 71:14.-11. With the other angel, cf. vs. 4; the writer connects the following with the previous, and with his statement and showed me that which was secret enlarges on the secrets of the physical world before he answers Noah's question, for the answer does not follow till vs. 24. The first and the last, i.e. all, Repositories of the winds, cf. 18:1.-12. Spirits are divided,
i.e. to what phenomena of nature special spirits are given; cf. vs. 16-21. This peculiar, gnostic way of allotting spirits or angels is a certain proof of the comparatively late origin of these additions. The notion is frequently developed in later Jewish books, e.g. Book of the Jubilees, chap. 5. Augustine (Quest. 83, 79) remarks:

unaquaeque res visibilis in hoc mundo habet potestatem angelicam sibi praepositam. Cf. also Sir. xxxix. 28, 29 and Langen, p. 306 sqq. Weighing, not in the moral and judicial sense, but rather, as in 43:2, to indicate that these phenomena receive each only a certain mass of substance and degree of power, as in Job xxviii. 25. Power of the lights of the moon, i.e. in the different phases of her appearance; cf. 43:2. Power of justice, i.e. that even these natural phenomena, and not only the moral world, are guided by a certain power of justice. Divisions and the following are still objects of showed in vs. 11; cf. 82:9 sqq.-13. Cf. Job xxxvii. 1-5.-14. Places of rest are not repositories. Thunder and lightning originate together, but the former must wait a certain time before it can resound, and this waiting is done in the places of rest.-15. The whole government of these two phenomena is in the hands of their angel. Divides equally allows them to appear only in a certain number and at a certain time.-16. This explains the tide and ebb of the sea.-17. Is his (own) angel, i.e. has his own peculiar (GTR) angel (Dillmann). The spirit of hail is good to show that this generally injurious phenomenon is not under a demon.-18. Left go, i.e. allowed him to be independent, but strangely on account of its strength! -19. The fog he especially enlarges on, on account of its frequent occurrence. It can appear both in clear and in dark weather, and at all times. The rest of the sentence is mysterious.-20. That the dew is closely connected with both rain and fog is easily understood.-21. As the rain is so important for the world, even ethically (Job xxxvii. 12, 13), its guidance is entrusted not to its own spirit, but to the angels; cf. Job xxviii. 26; xxxviii. 25-27, 33-38.-24. Now first comes the answer to Noah's question, vs. 9. These monsters will be fed by those destroyed in the deluge, as God has determined, according to his greatness, and thus the punishment will not be in vain. According to other apocryphal and rabbinical writings these two monsters are to be the food of the just in the Messianic times; cf. Drummond, p. 355.-25. Cf. Gen. viii. 21, 22; En. 50:3; 61:13.
    CHAP. 61. 1. The author of the Parables continues with an account of how the future Messianic kingdom was measured. The account is, then, in full harmony with the object of the third Parable, 58:1, and rests on Zech. ii. 5-9; also cf. Ezek. xl. 3 sqq. and xlvii. 3 sqq. Those angels, i.e. those will-known angels, already mentioned so frequently. Took wings is especially added because the Old Testament does not represent angels as possessing wings. Towards the north, of uncertain meaning; but cf. 25:5.-2. The angel here asked is the angel of peace; cf. 40:2. Went out to measure, the object is supplied further on in stating that they will measure the future home of the just.-3. Therefore they are called the measures of the just. The result will be that the just will lean firmly on the Lord.-4. After the future Messianic kingdom has been measured out, then the chosen will dwell there with the chosen, no longer mixed and interfered with by the unjust; cf. 38:1; 53:6; 62:8; the reward promised to fidelity will be given them, and righteousness during the time of oppression will now receive its reward, and be manifested as being will founded.-5. On the day of the Chosen One, which is the day of the realization of the prophecies just stated, the departed saints shall return and take part in the happiness. As he speaks here only of the bliss of the saints, and not of the condemnation of the sinners, he mentions only the resurrection of the former, but thereby in no wise contradicts his previous doctrine of a general resurrection, 51:1. By the sea and by beasts, to show that God will fulfil his promises to all, even to those who according to human ideas could not possibly rise again. If we were allowed to believe that the author taught the resurrection of the body as well as of the soul, the force of this clause would be greatly increased. Unless the word earth in 51:1 is simply used rhetorically to round off the sentence we might believe that the earth there is the receptacle for the bodies and Sheol and hell for the souls, and that the bodily resurrection is there taught also.-6. All who dwell in heaven, i.e. the angels. Received command, as the following shows, to praise and to exalt.-7. That one, i.e. the Messiah. It may be that instead of Kâl we should read bakâla, i.e. jussu, agreeing with verse 6, and thus translate: And that one, according to the command, they praised first; cf. 40:5. Spirit of life, undoubtedly an expression for their enthusiasm.-8. Modeled after Ps. cx. 1. The words as they stand indicate that the Messiah is to judge the angels also, as they alone are called holy ones in the high heavens. But in verse 10 those here judged are distinctly separated from the host of heavens, and then it is against the spirit of the book that the good angels should be judged. In high heavens is, beyond all doubt, an addition of the translator. The idea of angels was still in his mind from vs. 6 and 7,

and he did not notice the change of subjects in this verse. But that the just shall be judged is in perfect harmony with the strictly forensic character of the judgment in the Parables, and suits remarkably well to the connection. Weighed, cf. note on 41:1.-9. Secret; as all the secret wickedness of the sinners shall be judged, thus too shall the secret and unappreciated virtue and firmness of the just receive their reward. By the word,
i.e. either in the name of the Lord, as if the Lord himself pronounced the judgment, or, taking nagar in the sense of mandatum (Judith ii. 1; Gen. xxiv. 9), by the command of, thus commenting on verse 8.-10. At the sight of this final justice and happiness accorded to the saints by God through the Messiah, all the hosts of heaven, and even the Messiah himself, will praise and glorify God. Host of God, distinguished from the general host of heavens, are the archangels, divided here and 71:7 into the three scriptural classes of Cherubim, Seraphim, and Ophanim. The last name is from Ezra I. and x. Angels of power and supremacy, cf. Col. I. 16; Eph. I. 21. As no anticlimax can be thought of, it cannot be decided whether these co- or sub-ordinate to the archangels; cf. Test. Levi, 3. Other powers, i.e. the lower classes of angels. Chosen One, cf. 40:5.-11. The motives that prompt to this praise are of the highest spiritual character. On the doxology, cf. 39:10.-12. Who do not sleep, cf. note on 12:2. Garden of justice. In 70:4 Enoch finds the first patriarchs there. According to the first part, when he visited Paradise (cf. note on 32:6) it was apparently empty, These expressions can scarcely be harmonized with the rest of the book; cf. note on 60:7, 8. Spirit of light is founded on passages like Job xxiv. 13 sqq.; xxxviii. 15. All flesh shows that most assuredly not all flesh dwells in the Paradise. The author evidently thinks that it is the place of the departed saints, where they shall remain to the coming of the Messiah.-13. They praise those attributes of God which he has chiefly exhibited in the judgment.
    CHAP. 62. 1. This is one of the most interesting and important chapters in the whole book: interesting, because it so well portrays the forensic character of the last judgment, important, because it affords the best hold for those who claim, for the Parables at least, a Christian origin; and Hilgenfeld has taken some of his sharpest javelins from this chapter in his Die jüdische Apokalyptik, etc., 1857.-After the judgment of the just comes that of the kings and the mighty, together with those who dwell on the earth. There is a temporal, but no local, difference between these judgments, as in verse 3 the kings must behold the just judgment of the saints. It is no tautology to bring in this judgment here as in 46:4-8; 48:8-10; 53-54:3, only certain phases of this judgment are recorded, but here the very act with its connecting circumstances are recorded. Just when the resurrection of the dead sinners, made necessary from 51:1 before this judgment, shall take place is not stated, but verse 2 of that chapter almost forces the idea that it is to be contemporaneous with the resurrection of the just, mentioned 61:5. There no mention of the rising of the wicked was needed; but, as in the author's mind the two classes will rise together, he makes no mention here of the resurrection. Kings and powerful, cf. 38:4; 46:7; 62:3, 6, 9; 63:1, 12; 67:8, 12. His polemics are against the rich and exalted who are happy in the possessions of this world, trust them only, and care not for the future. Now these proud ones will not even be able to lift up their eyes, out of shame and fear on account of their former conduct. They had denied the Messiah, but now must see that he has come as judge. Horns, cf. Ps. lxxv. 4, 5. As a curiosity it may be mentioned that Hilgenfeld, p. 174, claims that the word recognize implies that they had seen the Messiah before, and this must have been in the time when Christ became man!-2. As this verse is Modeled after Isa. xi. 4, and the expression the spirit of justice was poured out over him suits only the Messiah, and not God, the over him must refer to the Messiah. To interpret it of God breaks the whole force of this and the following verses; cf. Psalt. Salom. xvii. 39; 4 Ezra xiii. 10 sqq. The perfect is used here because Enoch saw these things.-3. Now he continues prophetically to his readers, and speaks in the future tense. In looking at the word know here and recognized verse 1, it seems that those judged here are those who had heard of the coming Messiah through the prophets, but had refused to hear of him, had denied him and his judgments, but are now convinced by his presence. The seer would then be addressing the fallen in Israel alone, and the judgment would be a partial one, as it is in 90:26. Thus also it would be in perfect harmony with the conversion of the heathen nations to the Messianic kingdom described in chap. 57 and elsewhere. In vain; from the forensic character of the judgment this must mean that nothing but justice shall here decide.-4. Cf. Isa. xxi. 3; xxvi. 17; xxxvii. 3; Jer. iv. 31; xxii. 23; xxx. 6; John xvi. 21; Homer, Il. 11, 269 sqq.-5. Son

of the woman, found only here in all apocryphal writings. Hilgenfeld, p. 157, confidently claims this expression as a proof of the Christian origin of the Parables, as the idea of a mysterious Messiah coming from on high and of a chosen man born in the ordinary way could not have been combined until the coming of Christ in the flesh. But we must remember that the Messiah of the Parables is far from being a divine being; and even if the name could not be based on a combination of Dan. vii. and Mic. v. 2 (as it may, however), the objection that is here raised against the human side of the Messiah in his name as Son of the woman would be every bit as valid against his name as Son of man. The name, however, was easily suggested by the biblical Son of man. Furthermore, as the translators of the Ethiopic Bible frequently introduced New Testament expressions into the Old (cf. Herzog, R. E. xii. p. 310) it is easily possible that he word woman was introduced by the Christian translator for man, or by the copyist, as beezit (woman) and beeze (man) are distinguished by only one letter.-6. Rules, from Dan. vii. 14.-7, 8. Was hidden, cf. 48:6, 7. The idea that this Messiah was hidden is based on his sudden and mysterious appearance Dan. vii. 13. The idea here could under no circumstances refer to the dwelling of the Logos with God before Christ became man, for here the Messiah is hidden until the day of judgment, and then suddenly appears-a statement entirely strange to a Christian, who knew the Messiah had appeared, but also that the final judgment had not; whereas the appearance of the Messiah on the final day only could easily have been developed from Old Testament premises by a one-sided exegesis. Congregation of saints, cf. 38:1; 53:6. Sown, i.e. established; cf. 10:16.-9. Now those who had denied him will even petition the Messiah for mercy.-10, 11. But this will be in vain. Shame and darkness, cf. 46:6. Angels of punishment, cf. note on 53:3.-12. Spectacle, cf. 27:3, 4; 48:9, 10. Drunk, cf. Isa. xxxiv. 5, 6.-13. The punishment of the sinners after the sentence has been passed will take place where the just will not see them; cf. note on 38:3. The act of judgment is the spectacle the just shall see, but the terrors of punishment they shall not behold.-14. Cf. Isa. iv. 5, 6; lx. 17-22; Zeph. iii. 15-17; Zech. ii. 9, 15; ix. 7, 8; En. 38:1; 45:4; 105:2. Hoffmann strangely connects this passage with Matt. xxvi. 29. To all eternity; the eternity of the Messianic kingdom is taught by many apocryphal writers; cf. 3 Sibyl. 49-50, 766; Psalt. Salom. xvii. 4 (based on Jer. xxiv. 6; Ezek. xxxvii. 25; Joel iv. 20; Dan. vii. 27).-15. Will have risen does not refer to the resurrection, but forms simply an antithesis to the second clause. Garments of life, cf. 10:17; 58:3, and note on 37:4.-16. Will not become old; as the garments of life are symbols of eternal life it is stated that they will not grow old; cf. Deut. viii. 4; xxix. 5.
    CHAP. 63, 1. Connecting with one of the most interesting statements in his account of the judgment, viz. the deliverance of the wicked into the hands of the angels of punishment, 62:11, the author relates what happens after these criminals have been removed from the presence of the just, 62:13. While the condemned are being led off to their punishment they petition their guards for rest, i.e. respite, until they can worship and petition the Lord of the spirits. It must be observed here that although their chief sin consisted in their relation to the Messiah and his kingdom, they desire still to petition God for mercy, again reminding us of the fact that the Messiah is only a deputy of God, and can act only in his name.-2. Their prayer consists in acknowledging what they formerly denied. On the doxology cf. 22:14; 39:10 sqq.; 61:11.-3. Cf. 49:2.-6. Cf. vs. 2 and note on 10:5.-8. It is evidently a matter of importance for the author to inculcate the doctrine that after the appearance of the Messiah there will be no chance whatever of being delivered from the just punishment.-10. Cf. chap. 53 and Ps. xlix. 7-12. Hell; the original has Sheol. That the punishment shall consist in burning is taught throughout the Parables; cf. 54:1, 2, 5, 6; 63:10; 48:9.-11. Cf. vs. 11 and
12.-12 is a formal conclusion, not to the third parable, but only to chap. 62 and 63.
    CHAP. 64. But the Messianic kingdom is not yet completed. In 55:4 he had said that the Messiah should judge even the fallen angels, and now he records the fact that they were in reality judged. As however this judgment was of little importance for his object, he simply mentions it here in addition to the statements of 54:3; 55:3, 4; cf. 90:24. Faces, or forms, GTR; cf. 17:1 and 40:2.

SECTION XI.

   CHAP. 65.-And in those days Noah saw the earth that it was curved, and that its destruction was near. 2. And he lifted up his feet from there, and went to the ends of the earth, and called to his grandfather Enoch; and Noah said with a bitter voice: "Hear me! hear me! hear me!" three times. 3. And he said to him: "Tell me what is it that has been done on the earth, that the earth is so tired out and shaken? May I not be destroyed with it!" 4. And after this time there was a great trembling on the earth, and a voice was heard from heaven, and I fell on my face. 5. And Enoch, my grandfather, came and stood by me and said to me: "Why dost thou so bitterly and lamentingly cry to me? 6. A command has come from before the presence of the Lord over all those who dwell on the earth, that their end is at hand, because they know all the secrets of the angels, and all the violence of the satans, and all the powers of secrecy, and all the powers of those who practice sorcery and the powers of fascination, and the powers of those who make metal images of the whole earth; 7. and also how silver is produced from the dust of the earth, and how soft metal originates on the earth.
8. For lead and zinc are not produced like the former; a fountain it is which produces them, and an angel who stands in it; and that angel is excellent." 9. And after that my grandfather Enoch took hold of me with his hand, and raised me up, and said to me: "Go, for I have asked the Lord of the spirits concerning this shaking of the earth. 10. And he said to me: 'On account of their injustice their judgment is completed; and will not be counted before me concerning the months which they have searched out, and through which they have learned that the earth will be destroyed and those who live thereon. 11. And for them there will be no place of refuge to eternity, because they have showed them that which was secret, and they will be judged; but not thou, my son; the Lord of the spirits knows that thou art clean and free of this blame concerning the secrets. 12. And he has strengthened thy name among the holy, and will preserve thee from those who dwell on the earth, and will strengthen thy seed in justice for kings and great honors; and from thy seed will proceed the fountain of the just and the holy, without number, to eternity."
   CHAP. 66.-And after that he showed me the angels of punishment, who are prepared to come in order to open all the powers of the water which is under the earth, that it may be a judgment and destruction over all those who live and dwell on the earth. 2. And the Lord of spirits commanded the angels who went forth, that they should not lift up their hands, but should wait; for these angels are over the power of the waters. 3. And I went away from the presence of Enoch.
   CHAP. 67.-And in those days the voice of God was with me, and he said to me: "Noah, behold thy portion has ascended to me, a portion without blame, a portion of love and of rectitude. 2. And now the angels are making a wooden building, and when they are gone to that work, I will lift up my hands upon it and will preserve it; and out of it will be [i.e. come] the seed of life, and a change will come so that the earth does not remain empty. 3. And I will strengthen thy seed before me to all eternity, and will scatter those who dwell with thee

over the face of the earth, and it [i.e. the seed] will be blessed and increased over the earth in the name of the Lord." 4. And they will enclose those angels who have showed injustice in that flaming valley which my grandfather Enoch showed to me before, in the west, in the mountains of gold and of silver and of iron and of soft metal and of zinc. 5. And I saw that valley, in which there was a great shaking and a shaking of the waters. 6. And as this took place there was produced from that flaming, flowing metal, and out of the shaking that shook them, at that place, an odor of sulphur, and it united with those waters; and that valley of the angels who had led astray burned under that earth. 7. And through the valley of that earth come rivers of fire, where those angels who had led astray those who dwell on the earth are condemned. 8. And those waters will be in those days for the kings and the powerful and exalted and those who dwell on the earth, a medicine of the soul and of the body, but for a judgement of the spirit, because their spirits are full of lust, that they be punished in their bodies, because they have denied the Lord of the spirits, and see their judgments daily, and still believe not in his name. 9. And as the burning of their bodies increases there will be a change in their spirit to all eternity; for no one will speak a vain word before the Lord of the spirits. 10. For the judgment comes over them, because they believe in the lust of their flesh, and deny the spirit of the Lord. 11. And those waters themselves, in those days, suffer a change, for when those angels shall be condemned on those days, the heat of those fountains of the waters changes, and when the angels ascend, this water of the fountains changes and becomes cold. 12. And I heard the holy Michael answering and saying: "This judgment wherewith the angels are condemned is a testimony for the kings and the powerful and for those who hold the earth. 13. For these waters of judgment are a healing of the angels, and a death to their bodies, but they will not see and will not believe that those waters change, and will become a fire, which burns to eternity."
   CHAP. 68.-And after that my grandfather Enoch gave me the signs of all the secrets in a book, and the Parables which had been give to him, and he compiled them for me in the words of the book of the Parables. 2. And on that day the holy Michael answered, saying to Rufael: "The power of the spirit forces me and angers me, and on account of the severity of the judgment of the secrets, the judgment over the angels; who can endure the severity of the judgment which is passed and remains, and before which they melt away?" 3. And the holy Michael answered again and said to Rufael: "Who is he whose heart is not softened concerning it, and whose reins are not shaken by this word? A judgment has come overt them from [i.e. on account of] those whom they have thus led out." 4. And it came to pass as he stood before the Lord of the spirits, the holy Michael spoke to Rufael: "And I will not be for them under the eye of the Lord, for the Lord of the spirits is angered at them, because they act as if they were like gods. 5. Therefore judgment which is hidden comes over them, to all eternity; therefore, neither angel nor man will receive his portion, but they alone will receive their judgment to all eternity."
   CHAP. 69.-And after this judgement they will terrify and anger them, because they have showed this to those who dwell on the earth. 2. And behold the names of those angels! and these are their names: the first of them is Semjâzâ, the second Arestîqîfâ, the third Armên,

the fourth Kakabâêl, the fifth Turêl, the sixth, Rûmjâl, the seventh Dânêl, the eighth Nûqaêl, the ninth Barâqêl, the tenth Azâzêl, the eleventh Armers, the twelfth Batarjâl, the thirteenth Basasâêl, the fourteenth Anânêl, the fifteenth Turjâl, the sixteenth Simâpîsîêl, the seventeenth Jetarêl, the eighteenth Tûmâêl, the nineteenth Tarêl, the twentieth Rûmâêl, the twenty-first Izêzêêl. 3. And these are the heads of the angels, and the names of their chiefs over a hundred and the chiefs over fifty and the chiefs over ten. 4. The name of the first Jeqûn; he is the one who has led astray all the children of the holy angels, and has led them down on the earth, and has led them astray through the daughters of men. 5. And the second is called Asbeêl; he is the one who has taught the children of the holy angels the wicked device, and has led them astray to destroy their bodies with the daughters of men.
6. And the third is called Gâdreêl; he is the one who has taught the children of men all the blows of death, and led astray Eve, and showed to the children of men the instruments of death, the coat-of-mail and the shield and the sword for battle, and all the instruments of death to the sons of men. 7. And from his hand they have come over those who dwell on the earth, from that time to eternity, 8. And the fourth is called Pênêmû; he has taught the sons of men the bitter and the sweet, and taught them all the secrets of their wisdom. 9. He taught men writing with ink and paper (GTR), and thereby many sinned from eternity and to eternity and up to this day. 10. For men were not born to the purpose that they should thus strengthen their fidelity with a pen (GTR) and with ink. 11. For man was not created otherwise than the angels, that they should remain just and pure, and death, which destroys all things, would not have touched them, but through this their knowledge they are destroyed, and through this power it devours me. 12. And the fifth is named Kasdejâ; he has taught the sons of men all the wicked beatings of the spirits and the demons, the beatings of the birth in the womb, that it [i.e. the birth] fall, and the beatings of the soul, the bites of the serpent, and the beatings which take place at noon, the son of the serpent whose name is Tabâ't. 13. And this is the number of Kesbeêl, who showed the head of the oath to the holy ones, when he dwelt high in glory; and his name is Bêqâ. 14. And this one said to the holy Michael that he should show them the secret name, that they might see that secret name, and that they might mention this name in the oath, and they may tremble before that name and the oath, those that showed to the children of men all that is secret. 15. And this is the power of that oath, for it is powerful and strong, and he placed this oath Akâe' into the hands of the holy Michael. 16. And these are the secrets of this oath, and they were strengthened by his oath, and heaven was suspended before the earth was made, and to eternity. 17. And by it the earth was founded on the water, and from the secret places of the mountains come beautiful waters for the living, from the creation of the world to eternity. 18. And by that oath the sea was created, and as its foundation he placed for it sand for the time of rage, and it dare not pass over from the creation of the world and to eternity. 19. And by that oath the depths were strengthened and stand and do not move from their places, from eternity and to eternity. 20. And by that oath the sun and the moon complete their course and depart not from their commands from eternity and to eternity. 21. And by that oath the stars complete their courses, and he calls their names and they answer him from eternity and to eternity.

22. And also the spirits of the water and of the winds, and of all the zephyrs and their paths, according to all the unions of the spirits. 23. And in it are preserved the repositories of the voice of thunder and of the light of the lightning, and there are preserved the repositories of hail and of the hoar-frost, and the repositories of the fog, and the repositories of the rain and of the dew. 24. And all these believe in and render thanks before the Lord of the spirits, and praise him with all their power, and their food is all thanksgiving, and they thank and praise and exalt in the name of the Lord of the spirits to all eternity. 25. And over them this oath is strong, and they are preserved by it, and their paths are preserved, and the courses are not destroyed. 26. And there was great joy among them, and they blessed and honored and exalted, because the name of the Son of man had been revealed unto them. 27. And he sat upon the throne of his glory, and the sum of the judgment was given to him, the Son of man, and he causes to disappear and to be destroyed the sinners from the face of the earth, and also those who have led astray the earth. 28. They shall be bound with chains and shall be imprisoned in the assembling-place of destruction, and all their work shall disappear from the face of the earth. 29. And from that time on there will be nothing that will be destroyed, for he, the Son of man, has appeared, and sits on the throne of his glory, and all wickedness will disappear before his face and depart; but the word of that Son of man will be strong before the Lord of the spirits. This is the third Parable of Enoch.
    CHAP. 65, 1. Now follows to 69:25 another Noachic interpolation. That it is such appears beyond a doubt from its contents. It has the peculiarities of chapter 60, and treats of the same subject, viz. revelation to Noah concerning the flood and attending circumstances. It is entirely of a fragmentary character, and certainly never existed as a tract of itself. In thought and expression it seeks to imitate the Parables. That Noah is here introduced as the seer alone stamps it as an addition foreign to the rest of the book. In 60:2 the vision was inaugurated with a motion of the heavens; here it is done by a curving of the earth.-2. Enoch had ascended on high, 60:8, from the garden of Eden, therefore Noah goes to the ends of the earth to seek his explanation of what he had seen.-3. The earth is here represented as weak and sickly, undoubtedly as a result of sin.-4. Before an answer was returned there was a violent shaking of the earth. A voice, cf. vs. 6.-6. A command was the voice heard in vs. 4. The destruction of the earth is at hand. Secrets of the angels, i.e. of the fallen; cf. 7:1; 8:1 sqq. Angels and satans; a clear proof that the fragmentist seeks to imitate the Parables, as the satans are unknown to the first part; cf. note on 40:7. Metal images; same as idolatry in chap. 7 and 8.-7. Out of the dust, cf. Job xxviii. 2. Soft metal, cf. 52:2, 5.-8. This soft metal is declared to be lead and zinc, whose origin the author, after his peculiar manner (cf. 60:13-15, 16, 21, etc.), explains in anything but a clear way. That even this mysterious fountain has its angel agrees perfectly with 60:16 sqq.-9. Cf. vs. 4.-10. Through their astrology (8:3) these sinners had learned that a judgment would come at a certain time, but on account of their sins God will not wait to the completion of that time; cf. also Tertullian, De Cultu Fem. I. 10: Et metallorum opera nudaverunt.  et incantationem vires promulgaverunt et omnem curiositatem usque ad
stellarum interpretationem designaverunt.-11. Enoch here speaks to Noah. Free, cf. Gen. vi. 9.-12. Noah is to be the father of a generation of the righteous. Fountain, cf. Deut. xxxiii. 28; Ps. lxviii. 26.
    CHAP. 66, 1. The angels of punishment, found only in the Parables (cf. notes on 53:3), are taken over from there, and are here employed for a purpose entirely foreign to them. Above they were employed in the final punishment, but here in the first. The object of the interpolator to connect his statements with the Parables is observed again here.-2. There is no difficulty in accepting angels here as referring to those mentioned in the previous verses. The angels of punishment are, although enemies of God, nevertheless subordinate to his will, like Satan in the Book of Job; cf. note on 40:7.

    CHAP. 67, 1. The author's paraphrase on Gen. vi. 9.-2. As the ark is to be the means of saving the seed of life, angels construct it. That angels thus assist in forwarding God's plans in this direct manner is not unknown to other writers: cf. 2 Macc. iii. 25 sq. with 4 Macc. § 4. The account by a different author, 89:1, is more biblical. Lift up, cf. Gen. vii. 16; En. 89:1. To that work; not to the building of the ark, but for the purpose of letting the waters loose; cf. chap. 66.-3. Cf. 65:12.-4. With this is connected the punishment of the angels also; and as they were the real cause of men's sin, their punishment shall be by a more terrible element-by fire. The portrait here given of this punishment, although based on the rest of the book, deviates in not a few particulars. Showed me, cf. chap. 52; 55. But what is stated above should take place in the final judgment the fragmentist boldly employs in the first. Notwithstanding the valley and the mountains are locally separated, 54:1, they are here placed together. In the west; taken from 52:1, and therefore does not require us to seek a place west of Palestine or Jerusalem; much less does it compel us to take a trip to Italy, and seek the burning valley near Vesuvius after the eruption, A.D 79, as e.g. Hilgenfeld and Drummond want us to do. In the general indefinite character of the description here it is just as easy to understand by this valley Gehinnom, even if this was east and not west of Jerusalem.-5. We see we are still in the time of the deluge.-6-8. The picture drawn by the author is this: There is a valley in which is medicinal water, used for the purpose of health by the powerful of the earth. But this valley shall through eruptions become a river of fire, and with that the place where the fallen angels will be punished. For a subterranean fire in Gehenna cf. note on chap. 27. And as the water-place Dillmann refers to Kallirrhoe mentioned by Josephus, Antiqq. xvii. 6, 5; Bel. Jud. I. 33, 5. This is indeed open to the objection that Josephus in the last passage quoted expressly states that these waters were sweet enough for drinking purposes, hence were not sulphurous as stated in vs.
6. But not only was sulphur often found in Palestine, especially in the region from Jerusalem to the Dead Sea (cf. Josephus, Bel. Jud. vii. 6,3), but is also in the Old Testament a standard medium of punishment for the wicked (cf. Deut. xxix. 23; Job xviii. 15; Ezek. xxxviii. 22; Ps. xi. 6); and that an author like ours, so characterized by inaccuracy, should fail in his chemistry when the failure was easily suggested by numerous Scripture passages is not surprising. Hilgenfeld and others have deemed it necessary to insist on the baths at Baiae and the eruption of Vesuvius, A.D. 79, as the only legitimate explanation of this passage. Hence, too, at least the present compilation of the Book of Enoch could not have taken place before that date. But even if we must do what the author permits us nowhere else,-go to the far west, and seek the baths of Baiae,-it is therefore by no means necessary to think of the eruption of Vesuvius. As Holtzmann has already remarked (Jahrbücher für Deutsche Theol., vol. xii. p. 391), Mt. Epomeo on the island of Ischia, much nearer Baiae than Vesuvius, suffered eruptions in the years 46 and 35 B.C., and then not again until 1301 A.D. This explanation is also recommended by the fact that Enoch pictures these phenomena as repeated. In verse 8 the so-called Trichotomy is distinctly taught.-9. Their spirits will change, will no longer remain so proud, haughty, and God-denying; their pride will be broken.-11. But after the angels have been removed for their final punishment from this place of temporal punishment, then those warm waters will grow cold. This makes it clear that the author imagined those springs heated by the fire underneath where the fallen angels were enduring their temporal torture. The author evidently does not trouble himself about the fact that the first part plainly taught that the temporal punishment consisted in being bound under the hills; cf. chap. 10.-12. The moral of his account is that this temporal torture of the fallen angels in such a manner that its evidence is constantly before the eyes of the rich who are luxuriating in the bathing-places is a warning for them. In making the powerful the object of his warning he again connects with the Parables.-13. The stress is a lies on angels; they were healed, i.e. as Dillmann remarks, probably repent; but it does not produce a similar effect on the rulers and powerful. Therefore, too, the second judgment shall be by a more terrible element-by fire; cf. Wisd. x. 7; Jude 7.
    CHAP. 68, 1. Should there have been any doubt that the author of the Noachic fragments seeks to follow the Parables, this doubt will be removed here, where he expressly quotes them as the source of his information. As the Parables treat mainly of the second judgment it is probable that the fragmentist desires to do so too in the following. This probability is heightened by the fact that the judgment is hidden. The

author stands at the time of the first judgment, but there is in reserve yet a hidden future judgment that seems almost too severe in the eyes of the angels. Then, too, the judgment, according to verse 5, is to all eternity.
-3. By this word, i.e. the word of God that declares this punishment.-4. But before the throne of God Michael acknowledges the justice of the judgment, and suppresses the involuntary pity; cf. Isa. xiv. 11-13.-5. This verse seems to say that the final punishment of the angels is so severe that none other will be like it.
    CHAP. 69. After again dwelling briefly on the terrors of this punishment, the author gives a catalogue of the angels that fell, differing to some extent from the account in 6:7. Most of these names in both places are of doubtful etymology and of little importance, nothing but the invention of some ingenious speculator.-4. This task is assigned to Semjaza in 6:3.-9. The abuse of this art was sinful. The writers sin for such reasons as are assigned 99:2; 104:9, 10.-10, 11. Writing is sinful, as it indicates a state of dishonesty; cf. Wisd. I. 13, 14; ii. 23, 24; Matt. v. 37. It, i.e. death.-12. Cf. Ps. xci. 5, 6, 13, according to the old Jewish interpretation. Beatings that take place at noon, cf. Ps. xci. 6.-13. The divine name used in swearing and witchcraft.-17. Cf. Ps. xxiv. 2; cxxxvi. 6.-18. Cf. Jer. v. 22; Prov. viii.; Job xxxviii.-19. Cf. Prov. viii. 28.-21. Calls their names, cf. Isa. XL. 26; Ps. cxlvii. 4.-24. Cf. En. 41:7.-26. With this verse we are, as the name Son of man, used of the Messiah, already indicates, again in the Parables, and this is proved by the ending of vs. 29. But whether these verses to 29 are a portion of a chapter cut out by the interpolator to furnish room for his remarks, or are to be connected with a certain part of the third parable must remain doubtful. They are, however, a good summary and close of this parable.

SECTION XII.

   CHAP. 70.- And it came to pass after this that his name was elevated during his lifetime to that Son of man, to the Lord of the spirits, away from those who dwell on the earth. 2. And it was elevated on the wagons of the spirit, and the name departed in their midst. 3. And from that day I was not drawn in their midst, and he set me between two winds, between the north and the west, there where the angels took the cords to measure for me the place for the chosen and for the just. 4. And there I saw the first fathers and the just, who dwell in this place from the beginning.
    CHAP. 71.-And it came to pass after this that my spirit was hidden, and it ascended into the heavens; there I saw the sons of the angels stepping on a flame of fire; their clothes were white and also their garments; and the light of their faces was like crystal. 2. And I saw two rivers of fire, and the light of that fire flamed like hyacinth, and I fell on my face before the Lord of the spirits. 3. And Michael, an angel from among the chiefs of the angels, took me by the right hand and lifted me up, and led me out to all the secrets of mercy and to the secrets of justice. 4. And he showed me all the secrets of the ends of heaven, and all the repositories of the stars and of the luminaries, and whence they proceed into the presence of the holy ones.  5. And the spirit moved Enoch into the heaven of heavens. And I saw there in the midst of the light how there was something which was built of crystal stone, and between these stones tongues of living fire. 6. And my spirit saw how a fire surrounded this house, on the four sides rivers full of living fire, and how they surrounded this house. 7. And around about were Seraphim and Cherubim and Ophanim; these are they who do not sleep, but guard the throne of his glory. 8. And I saw angels who could not be numbered, a thousand times thousand, and ten thousand times ten thousand, surrounded that house, and Michael and Rufael, Gabriel and Fanuel, and the holy angels who are in the high heavens

enter and leave that house. 9. And Michael and Gabriel, Rufael and Fanuel, and many holy angels without number came out of that house; 10. And with them the Head of days, his head white and clean as wool, and his garments beyond description. 11. And I fell on my face, and all my flesh melted, and my spirit was changed; and I cried with a loud voice, with the spirit of power, and I blessed and honored and exalted. 12. And these blessings, which proceeded from my mouth, were pleasing before that Head of days. 13. And that Head of days came with Michael and Gabriel, Rufael and Fanuel, and with thousands and with ten thousand times thousand angels without number. 14. And that angel came to me and greeted me with his voice and said to me: "Thou art a son of man who was born to justice, and justice dwells over thee, and the justice of the Head of days will not depart from thee."
15. And he said to me: "He calls 'Peace' unto thee in the name of the world which is to come, for thence peace proceeds since the creation of the world, and thus it will be to thee to eternity and from eternity to eternity. 16. And all who will continue to walk in thy path (thou, whom justice does not leave in eternity), their dwelling-places will be with thee, and they will not be separated from thee in eternity and from eternity to eternity. 17. And so long life will be with that Son of man, and peace will be to the just, and his right path to the just, in the name of the Lord of the spirits to all eternity.
    CHAP 70. This chapter, containing an account of the translation of Enoch into Paradise, is an interruption of the sense. This, together with internal evidences, mark it as an interpolation; but by whom made cannot, on account of its brevity, be decided. Name, vs. 1, often for person. Enoch's elevation took place, like Elijah's, on wagons; cf. 2 Kings ii. 11. The pre-existence of the Son of man is, at least unconsciously, here presupposed. Their midst, i.e. of men. He set me; indefinite expression for I was set. North and west is surprising, as according to the ancients the earthly paradise was in the northeast; cf. En. 77:3 and chap. 33.-4. The statement that the first patriarchs were in the garden of justice is more in harmony with the method of thinking pursued by the Noachic fragmentist than by the author of the Parables; cf. note on 60:7, 8, and Sibyl. Proœm. ii. 48; but cf. 61:12 and 89:52. From eternity modifies fathers, not dwell.
    CHAP. 71. Enoch's spiritual translation into the congregation of the Messianic saints is a worthy conclusion of the Parables as a whole; cf. 39:8 (37:4); 90:31. 1. After that, i.e. probably after the vision recorded in chap. 62-64. Sons of angels, imitation of sons of men, as a designation for angels; cf. also 69:4, 5; 106:5.-2. Rivers of fire, cf. Dan. vii. 10 and En. 72:6, 14, 19.-3. Unlike in the Noachic fragments, 60:4, Michael himself raises the seer; cf. Dan. x. 13; xii. 1. Secrets of mercy and justice, referring to the Messianic judgment.-5. Secrets of the ends of heaven, i.e. the secrets of the physical world; cf. chap. 14.-7. Cf. 39:13; 61:10, 12.-8. But cf. 14:21, 22, thus showing another difference between the two main parts of the book; cf. 1:9.-9. Cf. Dan. vii. 9; En. 46:1.-11. Spirit of power, cf. 61:11.-14. That angel, i.e. undoubtedly Michael, vs. 3.-15. The world which is to come, the Messianic kingdom, the HTR.-17. With the Old Testament blessing of long life, i.e. eternal life, the Parables characteristically close.


SECTION XIII.
   CHAP. 72.-The book of the courses of the luminaries of heaven, how it is with each one of them, as to their classes, their governments, and their times, as to their names and origin, and as to their months, which their leader Uriêl, a holy angel who was with me, showed to me, and their whole description as it is he showed to me, and how it is with respect to all the

years of the world and to eternity, till a new creation is made which will continue to eternity.
2. And this is the first law of the luminaries: the luminary sun has its ascent in the portals of the heavens which are towards the east, and his descent in the western portals of heaven.
3. And I saw six portals, out of which the sun ascends, and six portals into which the sun descends; the moon also rises and sets in these portals, and the leaders of the stars and those led by them; six in the east and six in the west, and all, each after the other, aright; also many windows to the right and to the left of these portals. 4. And first comes forth the great luminary called the sun; and his circuit is like the circuit of the heavens, and he is entirely filled with flaming and heating fire. 5. The wagons on which he ascends are driven by the wind, and the sun descending disappears from the heavens and returns through the north in order to reach the east, and is led that he comes to that portal and shines on the surface of heaven. 6. And thus he comes forth, in the first month, in the great portal, and he comes forth from the fourth of these six portals towards the east. 7. And in that fourth portal, from which the sun comes forth in the first month, there are twelve window openings, from which a flame proceeds when they are opened in their time. 8. When the sun rises from the heavens he comes out of that fourth portal thirty mornings, and descends directly into the fourth western portal of heaven. 9. And in those days the day is daily lengthened, and the nights nightly shortened to the thirtieth morning. 10. And in that day the day is two parts longer than the night, and the day is exactly ten parts and the night eight parts. 11. And the sun comes forth from this fourth portal and sets in the fourth and returns to the fifth portal of the east thirty mornings, and comes forth from it and descends into the fifth portal. 12. From then on the day is lengthened two parts, and the day is eleven parts, and the night is shortened and is seven parts. 13. And the sun returns to the east and goes into the sixth portal, and comes forth and descends into the sixth portal, thirty-one mornings on account of its sign. 14. And on that day the day is longer than the night, and the day will be double the night, and the day is twelve parts, and the night is shorter and is six parts. 15. And the sun is raised so that the day is shortened and the night is lengthened, and the sun returns to the east and enters the sixth portal and rises from it and sets thirty mornings. 16. And when the thirty mornings are completed the day diminishes by exactly ONE part, and the day is eleven parts and the night seven parts. 17. And the sun comes forth from this sixth portal in the west and goes to the east and rises in the fifth portal thirty mornings and sets in the west again in the fifth portal. 18. On that day the day diminishes two parts, and the day will be ten parts and the night eight parts. 19. And the sun comes forth from that fifth portal and descends into the fifth portal of the west and rises in the fourth portal, on account of its sign, thirty-one mornings and descends in the west. 20. On that day the day is equal to the night and becomes equal, and the night is nine parts and the day nine parts. 21. And the sun comes forth from that portal and sets in the west and returns to the east and comes forth from the third portal thirty mornings and sets in the west in the third portal. 2. And on that day the night is longer than the day to the thirtieth morning, and the day becomes shorter daily to the thirtieth morning, and the night is exactly ten parts and the day eight parts. 23. And the sun comes forth from that third portal and sets in the third portal in the west and

returns to the east, and the sun goes into the second portal of the east thirty mornings, and in like manner into the second portal in the west of the heavens. 24. And on that day the night is eleven parts and the day seven parts. 25. And the sun comes forth on that day from the second portal and descends in the west into the second portal and returns to the east in the first portal thirty-one mornings and descends into the west into the first portal. 26. And on that day the night will be so long that it will be the double of the day, and the night is exactly twelve parts and the day six parts. 27. And with that the sun has completed his stations, and he again returns to his station and enters in this portal thirty mornings; he rises and sets opposite it in the west. 28. And on that day the night diminishes in length by ONE part, and is eleven parts and the day seven parts. 29. And the sun returns and goes into the second portal of the east and returns to his course thirty mornings, rising and setting. 30. And on that day the night diminishes in length, and the night is ten parts and the day eight parts. 31. And on that day the sun comes forth from the second portal and descends in the west and returns to the east and rises in the third portal thirty-one mornings and sets in the west of the heavens. 32. And on that day the night is shortened and is nine parts, and the day is nine parts, and the night is equal with the day, and the year has exactly three hundred and sixty-four days. 33. And the length of the day and of the night, and the shortness of the day and of the night-by the course of the sun they are made separated. 34. On that account the day-course becomes longer daily and the night-course shorter nightly. 35. And this is the law and the course of the sun and his return when he returns; sixty times he returns and comes out, that is the great, eternal luminary which is called the sun to all eternity. 36. And that which thus ascends is the great luminary, as it is called on account of its appearance, according to the command of the Lord. 37. And thus he ascends and descends, and is not diminished, and does not rest, but runs day and night in his chariot, and his light shines seven times stronger than that of the moon; but as regards size they are both equal.
    CHAP. 72, 1. From here on till chapter 105 we have again the author of chapters 1-37; cf. Introd. The part here introduced with the special title of book of the courses of the luminaries, or the astronomical book, extends to chap. 82, but with the peculiarity of chap. 1-37, that with the discussion of the luminaries is also connected an account of the winds and other physical secrets. It may be regarded as an attempt to systematize the biblical accounts on these topics, but scarcely with any polemical intentions. Classes, literally families or clans. These are sun, moon, and stars, with the subdivisions of the last, 82:4 sqq. Government, cf. 82:4-20; 75:3. Names, cf. 78:1, 2. Origin, literally places of birth, i.e. of their rising. Uriel, cf. 21:5; 33:3; an evidence that we are again having the author of the first part, as this name is not mentioned in the Parables, at least not expressly; cf. note on 40:2. Yet these arrangements are not permanent, but will give way to new and better ones; cf. Isa. lxv. 17; lxvi. 22; 2 Pet. iii. 13; Apoc. xxi. 1; En. 91:15, 16.-2. With a special superscription an account of the sun's course is opened, and extends to verse 37. Portals; with this the author refers to his own theory, developed in 33-36.-3. Cf. 75:1-3; 80:6; 82:4-20. Windows, explained vs. 7 and 75:7. Right and left,
i.e. north and south.-4. Cf. 41:5-7. The composition of the sun is pure fire.-5. The movements of the heavenly bodies are on wagons, cf. 73:2; 75:3, 8, driven by the wind, 18:4; 73:2. Why the plural is used is uncertain. Returns through the north, cf. 41:5. The sun's punctual return is secured by his being led back to the right portal of the east, possibly by an angel, 43:2.-6. Great portal, in contradistinction from the small windows vs. 7. He commences his account with the first Hebrew month, Abib, the time of the vernal equinoxes (Josephus, Antiqq. iii. 10, 5), hence about our April. In the olden times it was called Abib, i.e. grain

month, Ex. xiii. 4; xxiii. 15; Deut. xvi. 1; but after the exile it is called Nisan; Neh. ii. 1; Esther iii. 7. It was the month of the Paschal festival. He does not begin with the first portal, at the time when the day is shortest and the night longest, but with the fourth, when the day has been already lengthening, in order to accommodate his system to the Jewish almanac. Of this verse probably Anatolius, bishop of Laodicea, made use, as recorded in Euseb. H. E. 7, 32 as GTR.-7. Twelve window-openings; the number determined by his general system of twelve, and presupposed at the other portals; cf. 72:3; 75:7. Flame probably is heat; cf. 75:7.-8. With this verse the course of the sun is commenced. The author's system is briefly this: There are twelve portals, six in the east, and six in the west. The sun ascends and descends from the time of the shortest day in the year in the first portal to the time of the longest day in the sixth portal, in each one of them one month; all the time the days increase. Returning, he begins his course in the sixth, and returns by monthly changing his portal, and daily decreasing the length of the day, to the first portal. Thus the sun ascends in one portal, and descends in the corresponding opposite one for two months every year. Therefore, too, each portal in the east and its corresponding one in the west represent two signs of the zodiac. From the first to the sixth they are respectively Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, and Gemini; and returning from the sixth to the first, respectively Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius. The months are nominally thirty days; but in order to at least approach a solar year, the author makes the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth, or the months of the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, and of the summer and winter solstices, have thirty-one days "on account of its sign," vs. 13, 19; but cf. 25:31. The author's division of the GTR into eighteen parts and their increase and decrease is of course simply a production of this desire to systematize, without any scientific value whatever. Much less could it be cited as proof that the author did not write in Palestine, as Laurence asserted.-9. Mornings, as the chief part of the day for day itself in Job vii. 18; Ps. lxxiii. 14; Lam. iii. 23.-13. Its, referring to portal, being the point of solstice.-15. Is raised,_ i.e. probably removed further from the earth, to explain the decreasing of the days. Dillmann translates, raises himself, i.e. starts on his trip anew, like a traveller.-35. Sixty times, because the sun is two months in the same portal. The author here disregards the extra day in the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth portals. Eternal, cf. Ps. lxxii. 5, 17; lxxxix.
37.-37. In size sun and moon are equal, but not in light; cf. 78:3 and Isa. xxx. 26.


SECTION XIV.

   CHAP. 73.-And after this law I saw another law with reference to the smaller luminary whose name is moon. 2. And her circuit is like the circuit of the heavens, and her chariot in which she rides is driven by the wind, and in a measure light is given to her. 3. Every month her ascent and her descent is changed; her days are like the days of the sun, and when her light is equal [full] her light is the seventh part of the light of the sun. 4. And thus she rises. And her beginning in the east comes forth on the thirtieth morning, and on that day she becomes visible and is for you the beginning of the moon, on the thirtieth morning, together with the sun in the portal whence the sun proceeds. 5. And the one half is prominent by the seventh part, and her whole circuit is empty, and there is no light with the exception of the one seventh part of the fourteen parts of light. 6. And on that day when she takes up the seventh part and the half of her light, her light contains one seventh and one seventh part and the half of it. She sets with the sun. 7. And when the sun rises the moon also rises with him and takes a half portion of light, and in that night in the beginning of her morning on her first day the moon sets with the sun, and is darkened in that night, with the seventh and the seventh portions and the half of one. 8. And she will rise on that day with

exactly the seventh part, and will come out and become smaller from the rising of the sun and shine the rest of her days, with the seventh and the seventh part.
   CHAP. 74.-And I saw another course and law for her, making her monthly course according to that law. 2. And Uriel, the holy angel, who is the leader of them all, showed me all things, and I wrote down all their positions as he showed them to me, and I wrote down their months as they were and the appearance of their lights till fifteen days are completed.
3. And in seven single parts she completes all her light in the east, and in seven single parts she completes all her darkness in the west. 4. And in certain months she changes her settings, and in certain months she goes her peculiar course. 5. And in two the moon sets with the sun, in those two portals which are in the middle, in the third 