son of Lamech, as the Gr. states, is Noah. The record here of an event that occurred after the death of Enoch does not demand that this chapter be ascribed to a new author; such chronological mistakes could easily happed to one writing thousands of years later than the events here mentioned.-2. Hide thyself is a command to Noah, as Moses hides on receiving a revelation, Ex. iii. 6; cf. En. 12:1; chap. 81.-3. The additions to the Gr. in this verse are probably by Syncellus himself.-4. Rufael, the same as Raphael, mentioned here for the first time, is an angel introduced by apocryphal literature, being found first Tob. xii. 15. Azazel, as the chief of these sinful beings, receives a separate punishment. Dudael is HTR, i.e. God's kettle; cf. Jude 6; 2 Pet. ii. 4; Irenaeus, adv. Haer. iv. 30. The desert as the place of his punishment is taken from Lev. xvi. 10, 22. The desert was frequently pictured as the abiding-place of demons; cf. LXX on Isa. xiii. 21; xxxiv. 13, 14; and Tob. viii. 3. This judgment is not the last, but only a temporary one, as the next verse already indicates. This first judgment, although stated in verse 5 as one forever, is modified in verse 12 as seventy generations, and in 14:5, as for all the days of the world. -5. As light is the picture of happiness (1:8, etc), darkness signifies misery. One of the chief horrors of Sheol is darkness; cf. Lam. iii. 6; Ps. cxliii. 3; Job x. 21, 22; xviii. 18; and in general, Ps. cvii. 10, 14; Isa. xlii. 7.-6. Great day, i.e. the final judgment, 22:11. The punishment by fire, vs. 13; 18:11; 21:7-10, and often.-7. Heal, in the sense of Isa. vi. 10, as could be expected from one whose name is from HTR. The action of the angel and that of God here run together as in Gen. xix. 17-22; xxxi. 3, 11, 13; Ex. xiii. 21 with xiv. 19. This healing, however, can only take place by first ridding the earth of the ulcerous giants.-8. All wicked deeds are recorded, 81:2, and the angels learn them, 100:10.-9. Bastards, i.e. the giants, the product of the union of two different kinds of beings, 15:3-7. The manner of this destruction shall be self-slaughter, as is also stated in the book of the Jubilees (ch. 5, p. 20): "And he sent among them his sword that each one should kill his neighbor; and they commenced to kill each other, till they all fell by

the sword, and were destroyed from the earth. But their fathers looked on, and after that were bound in the abysses of the earth till the day of the great judgment"; cf. En. 12:6; 14:6; 87:1; 88:2. From men, i.e. born of men.-10. The petition of the fallen angels is in vain, 12:6; 13:4 sqq.; 14:4, 7. Eternal life, i.e. long life, as the five hundred shows.-11. Michael, as the greatest of the angels, is to punish Semjaza and the rest of the fallen, with the exception of Azazel.-12. This punishment consists in first seeing the destruction of their children, and then being bound under the hills for seventy generations; cf. note on verse 4 and chap. 91 and 93. The idea here expressed does not require to be derived from the Greek fables of the Titans, but could very easily have been deduced by a Hebrew mind from passages like Job xi. 8; xxvi. 5; cf. Isa. xiii. 16. This punishment is exceptionally heavy, as the family-ties were especially strong among the Jews.-13. Abyss of fire, 90:25, 26. The final punishment is eternal, 14:4, 5; 22:11; 25:4; 27:3, etc.; cf. Jude 6; 2 Pet. ii. 4.-15. Souls of lust, 67:8, 10; and both the angels and the women are meant; cf. 19:2.-16. The plant of righteousness is the people of Israel; cf. 93: 2, 5, 8, 10, a term frequently found in apocryphal writings. The picture here gradually blends into a portrait of the Messianic times.-17. Long life was one of the greatest blessings in the Old Testament; cf. note on 5:7, and En. 25:5, 6; 58:3, 6; 71:17, etc. Sabbath, the last years of their lives, as the Sabbath is the last and resting-day of the week. A numerous progeny was also a great blessing; cf. Deut. xxviii. 4; Ps. cxxviii. 3; Prov. xvii. 6; and barrenness a result of sin, En. 98:5.-18. Cf. Hos. xiv. 8; Amos ix. 14; Jer. xxxi. 5; lxv. 21; Ezek. xxviii. 26, etc. This is the opposite from the condition pictured chap. 8 and 9. Justice is always joined with the happy time of the future; cf. note on 5:8.-19. The Old Testament frequently refers to the vine and the olive and fruitfulness as a source of blessing in the reign of the Messiah; cf. Amos ix. 13; Hos.
ii. 22, 23; Isa. xxx. 23-25; Ezek. xxxiv. 26, 27; xxxvi. 8, 29, 30; Zech. viii. 12; Ps. lxxii. 16, and especially Isa.
v. 10, of which this verse is an imitation; cf. also Harnack on Papias Frag., p. 87.-20. This refers to the deluge.-21. A sudden transition to the times of the Messiah, containing a well-known hope frequently expressed by the Old Testament prophets. In 90:37 the same is said of the Messiah, and in the Parables chap.
57.-22. Cf. Gen. ix. 11, 15. Sin; cf. note on 5:8.
    CHAP. 11, 1 Is simply a combination of the preceding; cf. Deut. xxviii. 12. The idea that there are store-rooms or receptacles for things good and bad runs through the whole book.-2. Cf. Ps. lxxxv. 10; Isa.
xxii. 17.

SECTION III.

    CHAP. 12.-And previous to all these things Enoch was hidden, and not one of the children of men knew where he was hidden, and where he was, and what had become of him.
2. And all his deeds were with the holy ones and with the watchers in his days. 3. And I, Enoch, was praising the great Lord and the King of the world, and, behold, the watchers called to me, Enoch, the scribe, and said to me: 4. "Enoch, thou scribe of justice, go, announce to the watchers of heaven, who have left the high heaven and the holy, eternal place, and have contaminated themselves with women, and have done as the children of men do, and have taken to themselves wives, and are contaminated in great contamination upon the earth. 5. But upon earth they shall have no peace, nor forgiveness of sin; for they will not enjoy their children. 6. They will see the murder of their beloved ones, and they will lament over the destruction of their children, and will petition to eternity, but mercy and peace will not be unto them."
   CHAP. 13.-And Enoch, departing, said to Azâzêl: "Thou wilt have no peace; a great condemnation has come upon thee, and he [i.e. Rufael, cf. 10:4] will bind thee; 2. and alleviation and intercession and mercy will not be unto thee, because thou hast taught

oppression, and because of all the deeds of abuse, oppression, and sin which thou hast showed to the children of men." 3. And then going, I spoke to them all together; and they were all afraid, fear and trembling seized them. 4. And they asked me to write a memorial petition for them that they thereby might attain forgiveness, and to carry their memorial petition before God into heaven. 5. For they could not, from now on, speak with him, nor could they raise their eyes towards heaven from shame on account of their sins for which they were being punished. 6. Then I wrote this memorial petition, and prayed with reference to their souls and for each of their deeds, and for that which they had asked of me, that they thereby might obtain forgiveness and patience. 7. And going I sat down near the waters of Dan in Dan, which is to the right [i.e. south] of the evening side [i.e. west] of Hermon, and read their memorial petition till I fell asleep. 8. And, behold, a dream came to me, and visions fell upon me, and I saw the vision of chastisement to show to the sons of heaven, and to upbraid them.
9. And having become awake I went to them, and they were all sitting assembled lamenting at Ublesjâêl, which is between the Lebanon and Sênêsêr, with their faces covered.  10. And I related before them all the visions that I had seen in my sleep, and commenced to speak those words of justice and to upbraid the watchmen of heaven.
   CHAP. 14.-This writing is the word of justice and the admonition of the watchers, who are from eternity, as the Holy and Great One commanded it in this vision. 2. I saw in my sleep what I now will relate with a tongue of flesh and with my breath, which the Great One has given to the mouth of men that they might converse with it and understand it in their hearts. 3. As he has created and given to men the power to understand the word of knowledge, thus also he has created me and given to me the power to upbraid the watchers, the sons of heaven. 4. "I have written your petition, and in my vision it appeared to me thus, that your petition will not be granted in all the days of the world, and that judgment has been passed over you, and nothing will be granted unto you. 5. And from now on ye will not ascend into heaven to all eternity, and upon earth, it has been decreed, they shall bind you for all the days of the world. 6. But before this ye will have seen the destruction of your beloved children, and ye will not be able to possess them, but they shall fall before you by the sword. 7. Your petition for them will not be granted unto you, nor the one for yourselves; and while ye are weeping and praying ye cannot speak a single word from the writing which I have written." 8. And the vision appeared to me thus: behold, clouds in the vision invited me and a fog invited me; and the course of the stars and lightning drove and pressed me, and the winds in the vision gave me wings and drove me. 9. And they lifted me up into heaven, and I went till I approached near a wall which was built of crystals and a tongue of fire surrounded it; and it began to cause me to fear. 10. And I went into the tongue of fire and approached near to a large house, which was built of crystals, and the walls of this house were like a floor inlaid with crystals, and the groundwork was of crystals. 11. The ceiling was like the course of the stars and of the lightning, and Cherubim of fire were between them, and their heaven was water. 12. A flaming fire surrounded the walls, and its doors burned with fire. 13. And I went into this house, and it was hot like fire and cold like ice, and there was nothing pleasant and no life in it: fear covered me, and trembling seized me. 14. And as I was

shaking and trembling, I fell down on my face and saw in a vision. 15. And behold, there was a second house, larger than the other, all whose doors stood open before me, and it was built with a tongue of fire. 16. And in all things it excelled in grandeur and magnificence and size, so that I cannot describe to you its magnificence and its size. 17. Its floor was fire, and above it was lightning and the course of the stars, and its ceiling was also a flaming fire. 18. And I looked and saw therein a high throne; its appearance was like the hoar-frost, and its circuit like a shining sun and voices of the Cherubim. 19. And from under the great throne came streams of flaming fire, and it was impossible to look at it. 20. And he who is great in majesty sat thereon; his garment shone more brilliantly than the sun, and was whiter than any hail.
21. None of the angels were able to enter, nor any flesh to look upon the form of the face of the Majestic and Honored One. 22. Fire of flaming fire was round him, and a great fire stood before him, and none of those who were around him could approach him; ten thousand times ten thousand were before him; but he required not any holy counsel. 23. And the holy ones who were near him did not leave day or night, nor did they depart from him. 24. And I had had so long a veil upon my face, and I trembled; and the Lord called me with his own voice and said to me: "Come hither, Enoch, and to my holy word!" 25. And he cause me to arise and I went to the door; but I bent my face downwards.
   CHAP. 15.-And he answered and spoke to me with his word: "Hear, and fear not, Enoch, thou just man and scribe of justice, approach hither, and hear my words. 2. And go, say to the watchers of heaven, who have sent thee, that thou shouldst petition for them: 'Ye should petition for men, and not men for you. 3. Why have ye left the high, holy, and everlasting heaven, and lain with women, and defiled yourselves with the daughters of men, and taken wives unto yourselves, and acted like the children of earth, and begotten giants as sons? 4. While ye were spiritual, holy, having eternal life, ye defiled yourselves with women, and with the blood of flesh have begotten children, and have lusted after the blood of men, and have produced flesh and blood as they produce who die and are destroyed. 5. Therefore I have given them wives that they might impregnate them and children be born by them, as it is done on earth. 6. Ye were formerly spiritual, living an eternal life without death to all the generations of the world. 7. Therefore I have not made for you any wives, for spiritual beings have their home in heaven. 8. And now the giants, who have been begotten from body and flesh, will be called evil spirits on earth, and their dwelling-places will be upon the earth. 9. Evil spirits proceed from their bodies; because they are created from above, their beginning and first basis being from the holy watchers, they will be evil spirits upon the earth, and will be called evil spirits. 10. But the spirits of heaven have their dwelling-places in heaven, and the spirits of the earth, who were born on the earth, have their dwelling-places on earth. 11. And the spirits of the giants, who cast themselves upon the clouds, will be destroyed and fall, and will battle and cause destruction on the earth, and do evil; they will take no kind of food, nor will they become thirsty, and they will be invisible.
12. And these spirits will not (?) rise up against the children of men and against the women,
because they have proceeded from them. In the days of murder and destruction.

   CHAP. 16.-and of the death of the giants, when the spirits have proceeded from the bodies, their flesh shall decay without judgment; thus they shall be destroyed till that day when the great judgment over all the great world shall be completed over the watchers and the impious. 2. And now to the watchers who have sent thee that thou shouldst petition for them who were formerly in heaven say: 3. 'Ye have been in heaven, and though the secrets were not yet revealed to you, still ye knew illegitimate mysteries, and these ye have, in the hardness of your hearts, related to the women, and through these mysteries women and men increase wickedness over the earth.' 4. Tell them therefore: 'Ye have no peace!'"

    CHAP. 12. Enoch was hidden, probably to receive the revelation that now follows, as Noah was to hide himself for a similar purpose, 10:2; based upon Gen. v. 24. The Targums of Jonathan ben Uziel and of Jerusalem both interpret the HTR as a retiring from the earth and associating with higher beings.-2. Holy ones, cf. note on 9:3, and is found in all the three parts of this book. Watchmen, a standard name for all classes of angels, good and bad (for the fallen angels are also called thus, 1:5; 10:9, 15; 12:4; 13:4, 10; 14:1, 3; 15:2; 16:1, 2; 91:15), and strictly confined to this portion of the book, the nearest approach to it in the Parables being those that do not sleep, 39:12, 13; 61:12; 71:7. They are mentioned first in Dan. iv. 17. For the writer of the Parables the term seems to indicate exclusively one class of angels, viz. the archangels; cf. 71:7; while in the first part it is used in this limited sense in 20 only, a chapter of doubtful authenticity. Cf. the Old Testament statements concerning the prophets as watchmen, Isa. xxi. 11, 12; lii. 8; lxii. 6; Jer. vi. 17; Ezek.
iii. 17; xxxiii. 7; Hab. ii. 1; cf. 1 Clem. ad Corinth, 56: 1.-3. King of the world; cf. note on 1:3. The scribe; cf. verse 4; 15:1; 92:1. The book of the Jubilees remarks that Enoch was the first to teach men writing. This was probably a kind of official title, which is modified 12:4 and 92:1, as scribe of justice, he being just himself, 15:1; 71: 14-16; and announcing the just judgment, 39:2; 81:6; 82:1; 108:1; and writing books for this purpose, 104:13; 108:9; cf. the interesting remarks of Dillmann, in Allg. Enleitung, p. xli. sq.-4. Cf. Jude 6 and En. 15:3 sqq.-5. Cf. 10:9-12. The forbidden union between an Israelite and a heathen could be forgiven, Ezra x. 19, but not that between angel and woman.-6. Cf. on 10:9.
    CHAP. 13. Azazel alone is here addressed, in harmony with 10:4 sqq.-3. To them all, i.e. to Semjaza and the other angels.-4, 5. The greatest of the fall is expressed by the fact that they who are of heaven cannot now raise even their eyes upwards out of shame for their deeds, 14:7; 15:3 sqq. Being cut off from the communion with God is one of the most terrible things an Israelite could conceive of, and thus this separation is one of the horrors of the Sheol; cf. Job vii. 7-10; Ps. lxxxviii. Writing was comparatively rare in the Old Testament, but was evidently a common thing in the time of the author of this book, and the statement here undoubtedly refers also to Enoch's literary character. Writing instead of speaking the petition is the tribute of reverence paid to the majesty of God, and is taken from the customs of earth's royalty. Furthermore, it seems that even Enoch could not speak to God, for none of his numerous questions are addressed to him, although God speaks to him, 14:24; 15:1.-6. Patience, i.e. that God should have patience with them. The angels, originally spiritual, 15:4, 6, are represented here after their fall as possessing soul and body, like man; cf. 19:1.-7. He goes in a south-western direction to the river Dan in the country of Dan. This river, a tributary of the Jordan, is also called the smaller Jordan, Josephus, Antiqq. I. 10, 1; v. 3, 1; viii. 8, 4. The banks of flowing water were favorite places for prayer, Dan. viii. 2; x. 4. As Hermon was a desecrated place, Enoch could not expect to receive a revelation there.-8. Sons of heaven; cf. note on 6:2. Revelations through dreams were frequent in the Old Testament; Gen. xx. 3; xxxi. 10 sqq.; xlvi. 2; 1 Sam.
xxviii. 6; 1 Kings iii. 5; Job xxxiii. 15, etc.; and Josephus, Bel. Jud. iii. 8, 3. Philo wrote a special work on this subject, GTR.-9. Ublesjael, being stationed between Lebanon and Sênêsêr, must have been a real, not imagined place, but what one is uncertain. The same must be said of Sênêsêr. As a mark of their lamentation, they have their faces covered; cf. 2 Sam. xv. 30; Isa. xxv. 7; Esth. vi. 12.-10. Words of justice, i.e. the just punishment. Being important, this vision is farther explained in chap. 14-16.

    CHAP. 14, 1. As the following is to be a minute description of the vision, it is very properly preceded by its own superscription. The angels are from eternity, in the sense of the biblical HTR, i.e. not eternity absolutely and metaphysically, but only subjectively, from a time hidden (HTR) to the author; cf. Orelli, Heb. Synonyma
d. Zeit und Ewigkeit, p. 69 sqq. and note on 10:4, 10 and 15:3, 4, 6, 7, 10; 12:4; 15:3.-2. Tongue of flesh, to emphasize his privilege as a human being, who is of flesh, to rebuke the angels who are spiritual. The contrast is strengthened by the fact that the author here evidently, as in 15, especially verse 8, and as it is probably done Gen. vi. 3, and Ps. lxxviii. 39, and certainly in the New Testament (cf. Wendt, Fleisch und Geist, p. 42, sqq.), attaches to the idea of flesh the ethical idea of moral weakness; cf. also 84:1; cf. the similar idea in Isa.
viii. 1.-4. The judgment has been passed, i.e. decided upon by the unchangeable God, 65:10, like the biblical HTR.-5. Cf. note on 13:4, 5.-6. note on 10:9.-7. Cf. note on 10:10. Speak, probably from falsely reading GTR for GTR, and should be: ye will not receive. The writing is of course Enoch's petition. To this and the following Irenaeus refers in adv. Haer. iv. 30, when he says: Sed et Enoch sine circumcisione placens Deo, cum esset homo, legatione ad angelos fungebatur et translatus est et conservatur usque nunc testis judicii Dei, quoniam angeli quidam transgressi deciderunt in terram in judicium, homo autem placens translatus est in salutem.-8. The picture here is evidently taken from passages like Isa. xix. 1 and the places where God is said to descend on a cloud, Ex. xix. 9; xxxiv. 4; Lev. xvi. 2; Num. xi. 25; xii. 5. In the Ascensio Isaiae, chap. vii., viii., in which Isaiah ascends up to the seventh through the other six heavens, the manner of the ascent is not stated, except that the angels caused it. The statements here are certainly connected with Isa. vi.; Ezek.
I. and x.; Dan. vii. 9, 10.-9. These holy places are surrounded by walls of the purest substances. In Zech.
ii. 5 the Lord is himself a wall of fire, and fire is the symbol of purity, Prov. xxv. 22; Jer. xxiii. 29; Mal. iii.
2.-10. The picture is taken from the shape of an earthly temple; behind the wall is the HTR or GTR.-11. Water, because transparent.-13. is an expression of his awful feelings in seeing these astounding phenomena.-14. Cf. Ezek. I. 28; Dan. viii. 17, 18; x. 9; Ascensio Isaiae, ix. 1, 2.-15. Now he sees the holy of holies, whose doors are open, which is to explain how in the following he can narrate what was within, although he did not enter; cf. the similar description in Pirke Elieser, c. 4. His not entering is explained by Ex.
xxxiii. 20; Judg. vi. 22 sq.; xiii. 22; 1 Sam. vi. 19 sq.-16. You, i.e. the readers.-17. Cf. verse 11.-18. Hoar-frost, to express the intensity of the whiteness; cf. Dan. vii. 9. Throne, the prophet Isaiah in his ascent finds a throne in each one of the seven heavens; cf. Ascensio Isaiae vii. 14 sqq. and Isa. vi. 1 sqq.-19. Cf. Dan. vii. 10.-20. Ascensio Isaiae ix. 27. Et vidi quendam stantem, cujus gloria superabat omnin, et gloria ejus magna erat et mirabilis.-21. Cf. note on verse 2. That God's residence cannot be entered by man is stated also 3 Macc. ii. 14 sqq.; cf. Ascensio Isaiae iii. 8 sqq.-22. The angels are servants, not advisers of God, hence they are not required in his GTR; cf. note on I. 9.-24. Word, not the GTR, but probably the GTR or command of God personified. Dillmann says it is equal to: Come here to hear my holy word; cf. Langen, p. 268, and the personification of the word of God in Ps. cxlvii. 15; Isa. lv. 11.-25. To the door, according to verse 21.
    CHAP. 15, 1, 2. Scribe of justice; cf. 12:3. Angels interceding for men is biblical; cf. Job v. 1; xxxiii. 23; Zech. I. 12 sqq. (Tob. xii. 12-15; 2 Macc. iii. 25 sqq.; Philo, De Gig. § 4.); Apoc. viii. 3, and in En. 9:3; 40:6,
7; 47:2; 89:76; 104:1.-3. Cf. 12:4; Jude 6.-4. The contrast lies here between spiritual and eternal on the one hand, and flesh and mortality on the other. The angels, being eternal, did not require propagation as a means of the preservation of their kind, and thus their lust had caused them to step out of their sphere. Their guilt was increased by the result of this unnatural union, the wicked giants.-5. Man, being mortal, did not sin by propagating his kind; cf. Test. Naphtali, 3.-6. That the angels are spiritual is not definitely stated in the Old Testament, but repeatedly in the New; cf. 1 Cor. xiv. 12, 32; Heb. I. 14; Apoc. xxii. 6; Acts viii. 26, 29, 39.-8, 9. Giants were the product of this lustful connection, and being the children of spiritual fathers, but begotten in sin, they are evil spirits. Syncellus has also 15: 8-16:1, and gives a good text. Justin Martyr (Apol. brev. ii. 5) remarks: GTR, but in his Apol. pro Christ. ad Anton. Pium he calls these angels themselves GTR. Tertul. Apol. 22 adopts the first view: Quomodo de angelis quibusdam sua sponte coruptis corruptio gens daemonum evaserit, etc.; as also do the Pseudo-Clement., 8, 18.-10 is omitted in the Gr., but was

undoubtedly in the original, as it suits the connection.-11, 12. The Ethiopic text is evidently not pure here, and departs considerably from the Gr., the latter having the transitive GTR, instead of the intransitive be destroyed, and the negative in verse 12 must be erased, as the sense and the Gr., which has simply GTR, demand. The sense is, according to the Gr.: The spirits of the giants destroy, practice injustice, cause destruction, make attacks, fight and struggle, throw down on the earth and assault, but eat nothing, assume ghostly forms or produce them, but become thirsty and rush upon mankind. But the acc. of the Ethiopic is better than the GTR of the Gr. On the view of later authorities on the subject of demons, cf. Hoffmann, p. 203 sqq.; Langen, pp. 322, 323.
    CHAP. 16, 1. Evidently simply continuation of the preceding. The GTR of Syncellus, which Dillmann calls a müssige sinnsstörende Glosse, does not belong to the text. In this book the judgments, both the first and the final, have many different names, e.g. the great judgment, 19:1; 22:4; 25:4; 100:4; 103:8; or day of the great judgment, 84:4; 94:9; 98:10; 99:15; 104:5; or great day of the judgment, 10:6; 22:11; day of completion, 10:12; while the Parables have, the great day, 54:6; or day of trouble, 45:2.-2. Clemens Alex. refers to this strange statement in his remarks, Strom. V. p. 550 (ed. Sylburg. 1641), cf. Justin. Apol. B.; Epiph. adv. Haer., 1:4; Tertul. De Cultu Fem. 1:10.

SECTION IV.

   CHAP. 17.-And they took me to a place where there were images like flaming fire, and when they wished they appeared like men. 2. And he led me to the place of the whirlwind, and on a hill, the point of whose summit reached to heaven. 3. And I saw shining places, and the thunder at the ends thereof; in the depths thereof a bow of fire, and arrows and their quiver, and a sword of fire, and all lightning. 4. And they took me to the so-called water of life, and to the fire of the west, which receives every setting of the sun. 5. And I came to a river of fire, whose fire flows like water, and is emptied into a great sea which is towards the west. 6. And I saw all the great rivers, and came to a great darkness, and went there where all flesh wanders. 7. And I saw the mountains of the black clouds of winter, and the place whither all the waters of the deep flow. 8. And I saw the mouths of all the rivers of the earth and the mouth of the deep.
    CHAP. 18.- And I saw the repositories of all the winds, and I saw how he had ornamented all the creation and the foundations of the earth with them. 2. And I saw the corner-stone of the earth, and I saw the four winds which support the earth and the firmament of the heavens.  3. And I saw how the winds expand the heights of the heavens; and they remained between heaven and earth, and they are pillars of heaven.  4. And I saw the winds which turn the heavens, which lead down the course of the sun and all the stars.
5. And I saw the winds upon the earth which carry the clouds, and I saw the paths of the angels; I saw at the end of the earth the firmament of the heavens above. 6. And I proceeded towards the south; and it burns day and night there where seven hills of precious stones are, three towards the east, three towards the south. 7. But of those towards the east, one of colored stone, one of pearls, and one of antimony; and those towards the south of red stone.
8. But the middle one reached up to heaven, like the throne of God, of alabaster, and the summit of the throne of sapphire. 9. And I saw a burning fire which was in all the hills. 10. And there I saw a place, beyond the great earth; there the waters collected. 11. And I saw a great abyss in the earth, with columns of heavenly fire; and I saw among them columns of

heavenly fire, which fall. and are without number, either towards the height or towards the depth. 12. And over that abyss I saw a place which had no firmament of heaven above it, and no foundation of earth beneath it, and no water above it, and no birds upon it; it was a void place. 13. And there I saw a terrible thing: seven stars, like great burning mountains and like spirits, that petitioned me. 14. The angel said: "This is the place of the consummation of heaven and earth; it is a prison for the stars of heaven, and for the host of heaven. 15. And the stars that roll over the fire are they who have transgressed the command of God before their rising, because they did not come forth in their time. 16. And he was enraged at them, and bound them till the time of the consummation of their sins in the year of the mystery." CHAP. 19.-And Uriel said to me: "Here will stand the souls of those angels who have united themselves  with  women,  and  having  assumed  many  different  forms,  have contaminated mankind, and have led them astray so that they brought offerings to the demons as to gods, namely on the day when the great judgment, on which they will be judged, shall be consummated. 2. And their women having led astray the angels of heaven, will be like their friends." 3. And I, Enoch, alone saw this vision, the ends of all; and no man
has seen them as I have seen them.
   CHAP. 20.-And these are the names of the holy angels who watch: 2. Uriel, one of the holy angels, the angel of thunder and of trembling; 3. Rufael, one of the holy angels, the angel of the spirits of men; 4. Raguel, one of the holy angels, who takes vengeance on the earth and the luminaries; 5. Michael, one of the holy angels, namely set over the best portion of men, over the people; 6. Saraqâel, one of the holy angels, who is over the spirits of the children of men who induce the spirits to sin; 7. Gabriel, one of the holy angels, who is over the serpents and over the Paradise and the Cherubim.
    CHAP. 21.-And I went around to a place where not one thing took place. 2. And I saw there something terrible, no high heavens, no founded earth, but a void place, awful and terrible.  3. And there I saw seven stars of heaven, tied together to it, like great mountains, and flaming as if by fire. 4. At that time I said: "On account of what sin are these bound, and why have they been cast hither?" 5. And then answered Uriel, one of the holy angels, who was with me, conducting me, and said to me: "Enoch, concerning what dost thou ask, and concerning what dost thou inquire, and ask and art anxious? 6. These are of the stars who have transgressed the command of God, the Highest, and are bound here till ten thousand worlds, the number of the days of their sins, shall have been consummated." 7. And from there I went to another place which was still more terrible than the former. And I saw a terrible thing: a great fire was there, which burned and flickered and appeared in sections; it was bounded by a complete abyss, great columns of fire were allowed to fall into it; its extent and size I could not see, and I was unable to see its origin. 8. At that time I said: "How terrible this place is, and painful to look at!" 9. At that time answered Uriel, one of the holy angels, who was with me; he answered and said to me: "Enoch, why such fear and terror in thee concerning this terrible place and in the presence of this pain?" 10. And he said to me: "This is the prison of the angels, and here they are held to eternity."

    CHAP. 17. With this chapter commences the account by Enoch of a trip through heaven and earth in company with angels. 1. With the word they the writer joins his account to the previous, referring to agents in the preceding narrative as the subject. As the following clearly show, the subject of took are the angels, chap. 12. What is stated, Gen. v. 24, of God is said here of the angels, for our verse has evidently been fashioned after that passage. These fiery images are, notwithstanding Dillmann's objections, probably angels. In 14:11 we also have the Cherubim, and 19:1 states that angels can assume different forms, and in the Old Testament the angels are seldom known as such when they first appear; and adding to this the general indefinite character of the angelology of this first portion of the book, and the passages Dan. x. 16; Tob. xii. 19,. Hoffmann's interpretation of angels is undoubtedly correct.-2, 3. He, indefinite subject; Place of the whirlwind, probably from Job xxxvii. 9.-3. As thunder is joined with lightning the places here are shining. The writer's views are principally based on Job xxxvi. 30-37; v. 15; xxxviii. 25; cf. En. 41:3; 44:59 (60:13-15). Bow, with which the arrows, i.e. the lightning, are shot, according to Ps. vii. 12, 13; Hab. iii. 9; Lam. ii. 4; iii. 12, and the arrows as in Ps. xviii. 14; lxxvii. 17, 18; and cxliv. 6; the quiver, Lam. iii. 12, 13; the sword, Ps.
vii. 12; Deut. xxxii. 41.-4. Water of life, cf. the fountain of life, in Prov. x. 11; xiii. 14; xiv. 27; xvi. 22; but water of life, Apoc. xxii. 17. The fire in the west is the great mass of fire from which the sun daily receives its necessary portion, 23:4; 72:4.-5, 6. It is curious that a writer whose object it is to oppose the entrance of Greek ideas should resort to Greek myths himself for his ideas, for that his statements here are not based on Old Testament premises is self-evident. The river of fire is the GTR, Od. 10, 513. That he mentions only this one stream by name, and that one, too, being an unimportant one in the lower world of the Greeks (cf. Preller. Gr. Mythologie, 3d ed., p. 671 sq.) finds its explanation in its name, as suiting the connection. This stream of fire empties into the Okeanos, an idea indeed strange to the Greeks, who, however, locate Hades near the Okeanos; cf. Hesiod, Theogony, 744, 760, 767, 779 (all later interpolations in Hes. cf. Flach, Die Hes. Gedichte, p. 58). Enoch's description is very much like Virgil's, Aen. vi. 259, 323, 549 sqq. All the great rivers, i.e. probably the other rivers of the lower world. Where all flesh wander is Hades, cf. chap. 22. The Old Testament pictures Sheol as the receptacle of all the dead, in 1 Kings ii. 2; Job xxx. 23; Ps. lxxxix. 48.-7. What is meant by these mountains is uncertain, as nothing like it is found in the Old Testament.
    CHAP. 18, 1. The winds are kept by God in repositories, on which cf. Job xxxvii. 9-13; Jer. x. 13; li. 16; Ps. cxxxv. 7, and En. 34-36; 41:4; 60:11, 12; and the object of such repositories is given Job xxxviii. 22 sqq. The foundations of the earth is a frequent biblical expression, cf. Isa. xxiv. 18; Jer. xxxi. 37; Mich. vi. 2; Ps.
xviii. 15; lxxxii. 5; Prov. viii. 29.-2. Corner-stone of the earth, cf. Job xxxviii. 6, and in general Ps. xxiv. 2; lxxxix. 11; Prov. iii. 19; xxx. 4; Isa. xlviii. 12. The four winds carrying the earth is probably the author's explanation of Job xxvi. 7, with the assistance of Job ix. 6 and Ps. lxxv. 3.-3. The pillars of heaven, Job xxvi. 11, are here declared to be the winds, for by their expansion they support the heavens.-4. distinct from the winds that support the heavens are those that turn the heavens and the luminaries; cf. 72:5; 73:2.-5. A third class of winds are those that carry the clouds; evidently an explanation of Job xxxvi. 29; xxxvii. 16. The paths of the angels on which they as servants of God and mediums of revelation descend from the heavenly home, 15:10, on the earth, as in Jacob's dream, Gen. xxviii. 12 sqq. It is aptly brought in here in connection with the winds.-6. From the west, whither he had gone, 17:4, Enoch now proceeds to the south. It burns, being in the south. The seven hills are in a group, six of them forming an angle. In the division of the earth between the sons of Noah, so minutely recorded in the book of the Jubilees, chap. 8, it is stated, p. 37, that the hills of fire formed a portion of Ham's inheritance.-7. Those to the south are red, probably because the heat is more intense there.-8. In the angle formed by the six others stands the seventh, like the throne of God, of sapphire, after Ezek. I. 26.-10. In the south he again sees the great Okeanos.-11. He is still in the south, where naturally the pool of fire, as the place of punishment for the angels, could be expected. Without number, in the sense of which cannot be numbered, a clause modifying the following words. Heavenly fire, the same as in Gen. xix. 24; Ps. xi. 6; Ezek. xxxviii. 23.-12. The place here pictured is a different one from the preceding, as chap. 21, which enlarges on these topics, shows.-13. This latter place is occupied by disobedient stars. The seven is simply a round number, cf. 18:6; 24:2; 32:1; 61:11; 77:4-8; 91:16:93:10, and

Winer, Realwört., under "Zahlen." Under no circumstances dare we bring in connection here the identification of angels and stars as was done in later writings (cf. Langen, p. 309), or think of the seven "throne-assistants" in Tob. xii. 15. The writer simply states that the stars, who have their laws, shall also be punished for disobedience, vs. 15, and possibly refers to the GTR, or comets, of Jude 13. And like spirits is not a personification of the stars, but states only that the motions of the stars while being punished was that of petitioning spirits.-14. The angel, i.e. Uriel, cf. 19:1, and chap. 20. The stars are here termed in Old Testament phraseology host of heaven. -16. The limits of the punishment are unknown to the writer, like 21:6.
    CHAP. 19, 1. Uriel, in conformity with the etymology of the word, is over the luminaries, as is expressly stated 75:3, and explains his conduct here and in 21:5, 9; 27:2; 33:3, 4. This other place of punishment, the one mentioned 18:11, is not yet inhabited, but is intended for the fallen angels, who are now temporarily being punished by being bound in the desert or under the hills, chap. 10, but shall at the final judgment be condemned to this place, cf. 10:6, 13; 21:10. Souls of the angels, a kind of anthropomorphism, like 13:6. With the change of forms cf. 17:1 and Test. Ruben 5. The statements here have their parallels in Justin Martyr, Apol. Brev. (p. 92, ed. Maur.), Apol. pro Christ, p. 46 (ed. Maur.), and Tertullian, De Idol. 4: Enoch praedicans, omnia elementa, omnem mundi censum, quae coelo, quae mari, quae terra continentur, in idolatriam versuros daemonas et spiritus desertorum angelorum, ut pro Deo adversus Dominum consecrarentur; and ib. 15: Haec igitur ab initio praevidens Spiritus Sanctus etiam ostia in superstitionem versura praececinit per antiquissimum prophetam (poetam) Enoch. These demons are, according to chap. 15 and 16, the spirits of the slain giants, and these being children of the fallen angels these latter persuade mankind to worship these demons, That the gods of the heathen are demons finds expression in Baruch iv. 7, and LXX on Ps. xcvi. 5; cvi. 37; Deut. xxxii. 17; Isa. lxv. 11. In Dialog. cum Tryph. § 83 Justin Martyr refers to the passage Ps. xcvi. 5 (xcv. 5 according to LXX) as proof for his statement.-2. The women, too, are to be punished, for they were not passive in the sin of the angels, but they led them astray by their beauty, cf. 6:1 sqq. and Test. Ruben, 5.-3. Probably the original of Clemens Alex. Eclog. Proph. § 2 (ed. Sylburg, p. 801): GTR; and of Origen, De Princ. IV. 35: universas materias perspexi.
    CHAP. 20. The catalogue of angels in this chapter is an uncalled-for interpolation by a later hand. The number six (the same number in Past. Hermae Vis, 3, 4, 1) does not harmonize with the rest of this book, for the writer, when he does have occasion to speak of the number of angels, always chooses one of the sacred figures, three or seven, cf. 90:21, 22; 81:5; 90:31. In the number (six), but not in the names, the statements here agree with Targ. Jerush. on Deut. xxxiv., and Philo, GTR. on Ex. xxv. 22. Another reason to doubt the authenticity of this chapter are the strange functions assigned to these angels. 1. Who watch, like the GTR, or watchmen of later Jewish theology, based on Dan. iv. 10; xiv. 20. Cf. note on 12:2.-2. Uriel. The functions here assigned to this angel are not in harmony with his deeds nor with the statements of our book, cf. note on 19:1. Uriel, not a biblical name, is also mentioned 4 Ezra iv. 1; v. 20; x. 28.-3. Rufael (i.e. Raphael), who in later works and in En. 10:4, 7 is the angel of healing (cf. Buxtorf, Lex., ed. Fischer, p. 27), is here vaguely called the angel of the spirits of men, the meaning of which expression is most mysterious.-4. Raguel. The name is not rare in the Old Testament as the appellation of a man, HTR, cf. Gen. xxxvi. 10; Ex.
ii. 18; Num. x. 29, etc., and GTR in Tobit, but as the name of an angel it is post-biblical. The moral accountability of the luminaries, mentioned 18:15, is also recognized here.-5. Michael is the angel of the children of Israel, in conformity with Dan. x. 13, 21; xii. 1; Assumptio Mosis x. 2, Ascensio Isaiae ix. 13, the Targumim, and later tradition.-Saraqael, a name nowhere else found.-7. Gabriel, whose functions are possibly connected with the account Gen. iii. 24.
    CHAP. 21, 1. The writer begins a second narration, treated in a somewhat different manner from the above, which covers to a great extent the ground already gone over. This verse is quoted by Origen, De Princ.
IV. 35, in the words: ambulavi usque ad imperfectum. Around, i.e. in a circuit.-2. He here repeats and enlarges on the place of punishment for the stars already mentioned 18:12-16.-3-6. cf. chap. 18.-7-10. follows a description of the place of torment for the fallen angels as in 18:11; 19:1 sqq. Sections; the word for

this is found only in one other passage, viz. Ascensio Isaiae iv. 21, where it is used in the sense of section or verse of Scripture.

SECTION V.

    CHAP. 22.-And from here I went to another place, and he showed me in the west a great and high mountain-chain and hard rocks and four beautiful places.  2. And beneath them there were places deep and broad and entirely smooth, as smooth as if a thing were rolled, and deep and dark to look at.  3. And this time, Rufael, one of the holy angels, who was with me, answered and said to me: "These beautiful places are intended for this, that upon them may be assembled the spirits, the souls of the dead; for they have been created, that here all the souls of the sons of men might be assembled. 4. These places have been made their dwellings till the day of their judgment, and to their fixed period; and this period is long, till the great judgment will come over them." 5. And I saw the spirits of the children of men who had died, and their voices reached up to heaven, and lamented.  6. At that time I asked the angel Rufael, who was with me, and said to him: "Whose soul is that one whose voice thus reaches to heaven  and laments?" 7. And he answered and said to me, saying: "That is the spirit that proceeded from Abel, whom his brother Cain slew; and it laments on his account till his seed be destroyed from the face of the earth and his seed disappear from among the seed of men." 8. And at that time I therefore asked concerning him, and concerning the judgment of all, and said: "Why is one separated from the other?" 9. And he answered and said to me: "These three apartments are made in order to separate the souls of the dead. And thus are the souls of the just separated: there is a spring of water, above it, light. 10. And thus also is one such apartment made for the sinners when they die, and are buried in the earth, without a judgment having been passed upon them during their lives.
11. Here their souls are separated in this great affliction until the great day of judgment and punishment and affliction upon the revilers to eternity, and the vengeance for their souls, and here he binds them to eternity. 12. And if it was before eternity, then this apartment has been made for the souls of those who lament and those who reveal their destruction when they were killed in the days of the sinners. 13. And thus it has been created for the souls of men who were not just, but sinners, who were complete in their crimes; and they will be with criminals like themselves; but their souls will not be killed on the day of judgment and will not be taken from here." 14. At that time I blessed the Lord of glory, and said: "Blessed is my Lord, the Lord of glory and of justice, who rules all things to eternity!"
   CHAP. 23.-And from there I went to another place towards the west, to the ends of the earth. 2. And I saw a flaming fire which ran without resting, and did not cease from its course day or night, but continued regularly. 3. And I asked saying: "What is that which has no rest?" 4. At that time answered Raguel, one of the holy angels, who was with me, and said to me: "That burning fire which thou seest running towards the west is the fire of all the luminaries of heaven."
   CHAP. 24-And from there I went to another place of the earth; and he showed me a mountain-chain of fire which flamed day and night. 2. And I went towards it and saw seven

magnificent mountains, each one different from the other, and magnificent and beautiful rocks, everything magnificent and fine in appearance and of beautiful surface; three towards the east, one founded upon the other, and three towards the south, one founded upon the other, and ravines, deep and winding, not one joining with the other. 3. And the seventh hill was between these; and in their heights they were all like the seats of a throne and surrounded with fragrant trees. 4. And among them was a tree such as I had never smelt before, neither among these nor among others; nor was there a fragrance like its; its leaves and buds and wood do not wither in eternity; its fruit is beautiful, like the fruit of the vine and the palm-tree. 5. And at that time I said: "Behold, this is a beautiful tree and beautiful to look at, and its leaves are fair, and its fruit very pleasant to the eye." 6. At that time answered Michael, one of the holy and honored angels, who was with me, who was over them [i.e. the trees].
    CHAP. 25.-And he said to me: "Enoch, what dost thou ask me concerning, the fragrance of this tree and dost seek to know?" 2. Then I, Enoch, answered him, saying: "Concerning all things I desire to know, but especially concerning this tree." 3. And he answered me, saying: "This high mountain which thou hast seen, whose summit is like the throne of God, is the throne where the holy and great God of glory, the Eternal King, will sit when he shall descend to visit the earth with goodness, 4. And this tree of beautiful fragrance cannot be touched by any flesh until the time of the great judgment; when all things will be atoned for and consummated for eternity, this will be given to the just and humble. 5. From its fruits life will be given to the chosen; it will be planted towards the north, in a holy place, towards the house of the Lord, the Eternal King. 6. Then they will rejoice greatly, and be glad in the Holy One; they will let its fragrance enter their members, and live a long life upon the earth, as thy fathers lived; and in their days no sorrow or sickness or trouble or affliction will touch them." 7. Then I blessed the Lord of glory, the Eternal King, because he had prepared such for the just men, and had created such, and said he would give it to them.
   CHAP. 26.- And from here I went to the middle of the earth, and saw a place, blessed and fruitful, where there were branches which rooted in and sprouted out of a tree that was cut. 2. And here I saw a holy mountain, and beneath the mountain, towards the east, water which flowed towards the south. 3. And I saw towards the east another mountain of the same height, and between them a deep valley, but not broad: therein also water flowed along the mountain. 4. And towards the west of this was another mountain, lower than the former, not high, and below, between them a valley; and other deep and sterile valleys were at the end of the three. 5. And all the valleys were deep and not broad, of hard rock. And trees were planted upon them. 6. And I was astonished on account of the rocks, and was astonished on account of the valley, and was very much astonished.
    CHAP. 27.-Then I said: "For what purpose is this blessed land, which is entirely filled with trees, and this cursed valley between them?" 2. Then answered Uriel, one of the holy angels, who was with me, and said to me: "This cursed valley is for those who will be cursed to eternity, and here will be assembled all those who have spoken with their mouths unseemly words against God, and speak insolently of his glory, here they will be assembled, and here

will be their judgment. 3. And in the latter days there will be the spectacle of a just judgment upon them in the presence of the just, in eternity forever; for this reason they who have found mercy will bless the Lord of glory, the Eternal King.  4. And in the days of their judgment they will bless him for his mercy, according to which he has assigned to them their lot." 5. Then I blessed the Lord of glory, and spoke to him, and remembered his greatness, as it is fitting.
   CHAP. 28.-And from here I went towards the east, into the midst of the mountains of the desert, and saw only a plain. 2. But it was filled with trees of this seed, and water dropped down over it from above. 3. It was seen that the water which it sucked up was strong, as towards the north, so towards the west, and as in all places, so water and dew also ascended from here.
   CHAP. 29.-And I went to another place, away from the desert, approaching the east of the mountains. 2. And there I saw trees of judgment, especially those that emitted the fragrance of frankincense and myrrh, and they were not like ordinary trees.
   CHAP. 30.-And above, over these, over the eastern mountain, not far off, I saw another place, valleys with water that does not dry up. 2. And I saw a beautiful tree, and its fragrance was like that of a mastic. 3. And along the edges of these valleys, I saw fragrant cinnamon. And I advanced over these towards the east.
   CHAP. 31.-And I saw another mountain in which were trees from which water flowed, and it flowed like nectar, which is called Sarira and Galbanum.  2. And over this mountain I saw another mountain, on which were aloe-trees; and these trees were full of hard substance like almonds. 3. And in taking that fruit it was better than all the odors.
   CHAP. 32.-And after these odors, as I looked towards the north, over the mountains, I saw seven mountains full of pleasant nard and fragrant trees and cinnamon and pepper. 2. And from here I went over the summits of those mountains, far towards the east, and passed far above the Erythraean sea, and went far from it and passed over the angel Zutêl. 3. And I came into the garden of justice, and I saw the mingled diversity of those trees; many and large trees are planted there, of attractive beauty and large and beautiful and magnificent, also the tree of wisdom; eating of it one learns great wisdom. 4. It is like the carob tree, and its fruit is like the grape, very good; the fragrance of this tree goes out and is spread far. 5. And I said: "This tree is beautiful; how beautiful and pleasant to look at!" 6. Then the holy angel Rufael, who was with me, answered and said to me: "This is the tree of wisdom from which thy old father and thy aged mother, who were before thee, ate, and they learned wisdom, and their eyes were opened, and they learned that they were naked, and were driven out of the garden."
   CHAP. 33.-And from here I went to the ends of the earth, and saw great animals there, and one differed from the other, and the birds differed as to their appearance, their beauty and voices, one differed from the other. 2. And to the east of these animals, I saw the ends of the earth, where the heavens rest, and the portals of the heavens open. 3. And I saw where the stars come out from heaven, and I counted the portals out of which they come, and I wrote down all their outlets, each one, according to their number and their names, their

connections and their positions and their times and their months, as the angel Uriel, who was with me, showed them to me. 4. He showed all things to me and wrote them down for me; also their names he wrote for me, and their laws and their deeds.
   CHAP. 34.-And from here I went towards the north, to the ends of the earth, and there I saw a great and magnificent wonder, at the ends of the whole earth. 2. There I saw three portals of heaven open in the heavens; from each of them proceed north winds; when one of them blows, there is cold, hail, frost, snow, dew, and rain. 3. And out of one of the portals it blows for good; but when it blows from the two other portals, it blows with power, and there is misfortune upon the earth, and they blow with great power.
    CHAP. 35.-And from here I went towards the west, to the ends of the earth, and saw there three open portals, as I had seen in the east, similar portals and similar outlets.
   CHAP. 36.- And from here I went towards the south, to the ends of the earth, and there I saw three open portals of heaven; out of them come the south wind and dew and rain and wind. 2. And from here I went towards the east to the ends of the heavens, and there I saw the three portals of heaven open towards the east, and over them small portals. 3. Through each one of these small portals the stars of the heavens come and go every evening on the path which is shown to them. 4. And as I looked, I blessed, and thus each time I blessed the Lord of glory, who had made the great and glorious wonders, to show the greatness of his work to the angels and to the souls of men, that they might praise his work, and that all his creatures might see the works of his might, and praise the great work of his hand, and bless him to eternity.
    CHAP. 22. Conducted to the west, Enoch sees a high mountain-chain, which is not the same as the seven hills in 18:6, cf. 24:1. As is seen by the following, it is Rufael that leads him, this angel thus appearing in the same role in which we find him in Tobit. The number four may be an error for three, cf. vs. 9. If four is correct, then Dillmann's suggestion that one of the places is for the class of mankind described 5-7, and 8, 9 the other places are described.-2. Dark, cf. note on 10:5.-3. According to God's own plan these places are assembling places of all the dead, in other words the Sheol of the Hebrews or Hades of the Greeks. The expression souls of the dead is absolute, meaning all the souls, and in this the writer is in agreement with Old Testament statements, where Sheol, entirely distinct from the grave, is for the souls of the dead who are called Raphaim, i.e. shades like the GTR or GTR of the Greeks, cf. Spiess, Entwicklungsgeschichte der vorstellungen vom Zustande nach dem Tode, p. 422 sqq.-4. Here these souls shall abide to the day of the final judgment. Deliverance from Sheol is a hope frequently expressed in the later books of the Old Testament, e.g. Ps. xlix. 15.-Lamented, i.e. as the following shows, not on account of their being there, but because of the injustice they suffered during life.-6, 7. One voice is especially noticeable, and that is Abel's, according to Gen. iv. 10. As the sins of the parents are visited upon the children, justice will not have been done to Abel until his brother's descendants are destroyed.-8. We see by this verse that the spirits of the dead are not all in one place, but are separated; and now follows the description of the other apartments.-9. Of these (other) apartments there are three. The reason for this septation is probably the author's conviction that the difference in the moral character produces a different fate after death, even before the final judgment. The apartment here (if indeed not identical with 7 and 8) is for the souls of the other just, i.e. for those who were just, but unlike Abel did not die a violent and undeserved death.-10. There are two divisions for the sinners, the first one for those who died without being punished during their lives, and who obtained even an honorable burial. According to the Old Testament (and according to Greek ideas) it was a disgrace of the highest kind to be left unburied.- 11. Here already they suffer affliction to the day of final

judgment (with which the eternity is identical, cf. note on 14:1).-12, 13. The second class of sinners are those who although sinners nevertheless suffered in the world. Before eternity, i.e. before the final judgment. But these, having already been partially punished, shall not again be judged like the other class, which statement shows that the final judgment is to inaugurate for those of vs. 10 and 11 a greater punishment than the terrors of Sheol. The killing of the souls here referred to is not annihilation, as many other passages in Enoch show, but is identical with the eternal death in the punishment of hell. Will not be taken from here, i.e. will not rise from the dead. That the just shall rise is clearly stated 81:4; 90:33; 91:10; 92:3; 100:5. Cf. on the whole matter what is said of the second death of the sinners in Onkelos on Deut. xxxiii. 6; Jonath, on Isa.
xxii. 14; lxv. 15; Jer. li. 39, 57.-14. As is his manner in receiving a revelation (cf. 24:7; 27:5; 36:4; 39:9-12; 81:3; 83:11; chap. 84, 90:40), Enoch blesses the Lord, in which he is imitated in the Ascensio Isaiae, chap. 6 sqq. Lord of glory (25:3, 7; 27:5; 36:4; 40:3; 63:2; 75:3; 81:3; 83:8) and Lord of justice (83:11; 90:40) are proper appellatives of God in this connection, as these two characteristics of his divinity were exemplified in the preceding.
    CHAP. 23, 1. He leaves the place of departed spirits, but remains in the west.-2-4. This is probably the same fire that he mentioned 17:4. Towards the west, a modifying clause of fire, not of running.
    CHAP. 24, 1. He fails to state just where that other place is, but as the mountain-chain of fire are the seven hills of 18:6-9, this new place must be in the south.-2. Here these mountains are positively identified with those mentioned in 18, but he enlarges on their aspect. Not one joining the other, i.e. they were parallel.-3. Fragrant trees, a proof that it was a blessed place.-4-6. Of these trees one is especially beautiful, cf. note on 10:19. Michael, as the special angel of Israel, instructs the seer on the special blessing in store for the true Israelite.
    CHAP. 25, 1. The conversation carried on here and above is very much like the one between Isaiah and the angel in their ascent through the seven heavens in the Ascensio Isaiae. -3. The throne that Enoch saw, 24:3, is not an illusion, but is in reality the throne of God. Although the location would answer, it is more than probable that the author did not mean Mount Sinai of 1:4 here, for God descends on Mount Sinai to judge, but here, as is shown by the context and expressed by the words, to visit the earth with goodness, cf. 77:1. Lord of glory, cf. note on 22:14. Eternal king, cf. vs. 5, 7, a biblical name of God.-4. This tree is here preserved until the time of the judgment. Mortal, literally flesh, cf. note on 14:2, and Gen. iii. 22-24.-5. Now the guide explains that this is the tree of life, Gen. ii. 9; iii. 22; Prov. iii. 18; xi. 30; xiii. 12; xv. 4, a hope found also 4 Ezra viii. 62; Apoc. ii. 7; xxii. 2, 14, 19; Testamentum Levi xviii, and by rabbinical writings, cf. Schöttgen, Horae Talmud. in Apoc. ii. 7. This tree, however, is entirely distinct from the tree of wisdom, 32:6. In the Messianic times this tree is to be transplanted from the south, where it is now kept, to the north, to the New Jerusalem, which is to stand on the site of the old, cf. chap. 26, 27. Such is the power of this tree that simply breathing of it gives long life; cf. Ezek. xxxvii. 9; cf. note on 10:17, and Isa. lxv. 19, 20.
    CHAP. 26, 1. Having mentioned that the tree of life is to be transplanted to the New Jerusalem, he now visits that place. As the Greeks thought Delphi, the centre of their worship, the middle of the earth, the Jewish seer here regards Jerusalem as such, as it is possibly already done, Ezek. xxxviii. 12; v. 5; Isa. ii. 2, and book of the Jubilees, viii. 2, where Zion is called the navel of the earth, like the term GTR, used of the round stone in the temple at Delphi as the centre of the earth in Pindar P. 4, 131; 6, 3. Early oriental Christians entertained the same views, cf. Tertullian and Jerome on Ezek. v. 5, and the former Contra Marcion II. 196. In En. 90:26 Gehenna is in the middle of the earth, and in the Ethiopic Synaxaria, de Melchisedec (Dill. Chrest. p. 16) Mount Calvary is regarded as such. Fruitfulness is constantly a characteristic of the Messianic times. The tree is Israel; it was cut as a punishment for its sins; the branches are the faithful, who will enjoy the Messianic kingdom.-2. The following is simple: the hill is Zion, the water is the brook of Siloah.-3. The other hill is the Mount of Olives, which is in reality but a few feet higher than Mount Zion. The deep valley is that of Kedron or Jehoshaphat, and the water is the Kedron brook.-4. The Mount of Offence and the valley of Hinnom.-5. The description is trustworthy, cf. Strabo 16, 2, § 36.-6. This is the valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna.

    CHAP. 27, 1, 2. As this valley is an important element in the Messianic times the author describes it more minutely, especially as the Old Testament statements on the subject are very indefinite. This valley is, according to the first part of Enoch, the place where the sinners are punished, 90:26, 27, cf. 4 Ezra vi. 1-3. In the Parables it is indeed mentioned that the kings and the mighty will be punished in a valley, 54:1, 2; 56:4, and in the sight of the just, 48:9, 10; 62:12, but there is no evidence whatever that this writer thought to specify any particular valley. Then the punishment in Gehenna, according to 90:23-27, is restricted to the unfaithful in Israel, and the scope of the verse before us is evidently no broader, while in 54 and 56 altogether different persons are punished "in the valley," cf. 38, 1. The author's statements here are at least partially drawn from Old Testament premises. That this valley is the place of punishment rests on the statements Jer.
vii. 31; xix. 6; xxxii. 35, and on the accounts in 2 Kings xxiii. 10, and on Jeremiah's curse, Jer. vii. 32, 33; xix. 6 sqq., and partially, perhaps, on the nature of the valley, for according to Talmud Erabin, fol. 19, a smoke ascended there, thus indicating a subterranean fire. That a fire destroys the sinners in this valley finds its explanation in Gen. xix. 25; Ps. xi. 6; Isa. lxvi. 15, 16, 24.-4. Lot, or a portion, cf. Ascensio Isaiae I. 3.-5. Cf. note on 22:14.
    CHAP. 28, 1. From the centre of the earth, the New Jerusalem, the seer goes towards the east, and from among the mountains of the desert he sees a plain.-2. This plain was, however, filled with trees of this [which?] seed. What places are here meant is a mystery. Dillmann conjectures the Arabah, or plain of the Jordan, and the mountains as the hilly tract between that river and Jerusalem.
    CHAP. 29, 1. He continues on his eastward trip, and there reaches the sweet-smelling trees, the Arabia and India of the ancients, to the HTR of Gen. x. 30, in which the ancients recognized the place of frankincense and spices.-2. Trees of judgment, i.e. trees that will be given to the just after the judgment to be planted by them, cf. 10:19. Also cf. Isa. lx. 6; Ps. lxxii. 10.
CHAP. 30. According to the testimony of the ancients cinnamon was an eastern product.
    CHAP. 31. Sarira, a word not found elsewhere. An Amharic vocabulary says the word means a black flower, cf. Dillmann, Lex., col. 343. But the form is probably corrupt. Galbanum, cf. Winer, Realwörterb., CHAP. 32, 1, 2. Zutel, a name otherwise not known (at least Buxtorf does not mention him), must be the angel guarding the entrance of Paradise.-3. The destination of the seer is the garden of justice, i.e. the Paradise, called by the same name 77:3; garden of the just 60:23; garden of life 61:12. The tree of wisdom is entirely distinct from the tree of life, 25:4. As wisdom is to characterize the just in the Messianic times the tree of wisdom is very properly here mentioned.-4. Carob tree, cf. Dillmann, Lex., col. 76.-6. Here we learn that it is the earthly Paradise that Enoch visits. It is not strange that the author fails to give any hint as to the object and future destiny of this garden. He could not make it the abode of the departed just, for they have their place in one (or two) of the apartments of Sheol, cf. 22:6 sqq.; nor could it be the seat of the Messianic kingdom, for this was to be at Jerusalem, cf. chap. 25 and 26, and therefore the writer must leave it out in the cold. And why the tree of wisdom should not be transplanted to the New Jerusalem like the tree of life, 25:5,
is not mentioned.
    CHAP. 33, 1. Now he gets to the ends of the earth, to the place of the extraordinary specimens of the animal kingdom. This chapter was probably suggested by the preceding, in which he visits lands favored with mineral wealth, or by the notices in Gen. ii. 19, 20 of the animals in close connection with Paradise.-2. Portals, or exits for the luminaries. Uriel, as is required by his office, cf. 19:1, instructs the seer in these matters. As Enoch had claimed a higher source for his knowledge of the judgment, 1:2, he here claims the same for his special book on the luminaries, chap. 72-82.
    CHAP. 34. Evidently he had been at the ends of the earth in the preceding chapter, and now goes to the extreme north. As there could be no portals for the luminaries in the north, he finds some there for the winds, joined with phenomena of nature such as could be expected in that region. As the north winds are usually injurious, but not always, he says there is one portal from which it blows for good, but two for evil. Cf. the system in chap. 76.

    CHAP. 35. The portals are of course for the setting luminaries, the outlets for the winds, as the latter expression, in the west suits only the winds.
    CHAP. 36, 1. The symmetry of the narrative demands that he goes to the south also. Here, as in the north, he sees only portals for the winds, but none for the luminaries.-2. He returns to the east, where he sees three portals for the winds which he had failed to mention 33:2, 3, and above these were smaller portals for the stars.-4. Cf. Ps. ciii. 20-22; cxlviii.; cf. 22:14.


SECTION VI.

   CHAP. 37.-The second vision of wisdom which Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, saw. 2. And this is the beginning of the words of wisdom, which I commenced to speak and to relate to those who dwell on the earth: hear, ancestors, and see, descendants, the holy words which I will speak before the Lord of the spirits! 3. It is proper to name the former first, but from the descendants too we will not keep back the beginning of wisdom. 4. And up to the present time there was not given from before the Lord of the spirits the wisdom which I have received according to my knowledge, according to the pleasure of the Lord of the spirits, by whom the portion of life everlasting was given to me. 5. Three Parables were given to me; and I commenced to relate them to those who dwell on the earth.

    CHAP. 37. The reasons for assigning 37-71 to a different author and time will be found in the Special Introduction. 1. The second, or other, vision of wisdom distinguishes it in plain terms from the first part, and like the heading 1:1 sqq. gives the object of the following. By wisdom, 82:1; 92:1, the writer understands the knowledge and appreciation of God's revelation (cf. vs. 4) concerning the true state of affairs in the time of the Messiah, in whom dwells the spirit of wisdom, 49:3, and it will be given by him to the just, 49:1. This wisdom could be obtained only by revelation, as wisdom resides in heaven, chap. 42. The genealogy here given certainly points to an entirely new element in the book.-2. After the heading in the preceding, Enoch addresses his readers directly; they are all mankind in all generations, The words are holy, cf. 1:2. As proof that they are true he speaks to them as if he were in the very presence of the Lord of the spirits. This name for God is peculiar to the three Parables, being found 38:2, 6; 39: 7-9, 12; 40:1, 2, 4-7; 41:2, 6, 7; 43:4; 46:3,
6-8; 47:1, 2; 48:2, 3, 5, 7, 10; 49:2, 4; 50:2, 3, 5; 51:3; 52:5, 9; 53:6; 54:5-7; 55:3, 4; 57:3; 58:4-6; 59:1, 2;
[60:6, 8, 25;] 61:3, 5, 8, 9, 11, 13; 62:10, 12, 14, 16; 63:1, 2, 12, [65:9, 11; 66:2; 67:8, 9; 68:4; 69:24;] 29;
71:2, 17; and is in the closest harmony with the contents of this portion of the book, cf. 39:12 sqq.; 41:8.-3. The reason for speaking to the ancestors first is, probably, not the reverence paid to old age, a virtue so characteristic of the true Jew to the present day, but rather, as the second clause indicates, their moral superiority over the later generations, which did not deserve such revelations. The beginning of wisdom in verse 2 and here, is in conformity with the whole object of the book as an instructor in true wisdom, used as in Ps. cxi. 10; Prov. I. 7; ix. 10.-4. Although it is stated in the first part that the just shall rise from the dead (cf. note on 22:12, 13), and that the Messianic reign shall endure forever (cf. 91:17; 92:4; 105:2), the distinctly expressed hope of eternal life is found only in the Parables; cf. also 39:8, 9; 40:9; 58:3; 71:14-17.-5. The author divides his tract into three parts. Parables; the word used in the original corresponds to the Heb. HTR, GTR (cf. Gesenius, Thesaur. p. 828); Dillmann, following the proposal of Hoffmann, Einleit., p. 13, translates Bilderreden; Maurice Vernes, Histoire des Idées Messianiques, has Paraboles, or Similitudes; Ascensio Isaiae iv. 21 it is used in quoting David's Psalms; Drummond uses Similitudes.

SECTION VII.

    CHAP. 38.-First Parable. When the congregation of the just shall appear, and the sinners are condemned because of their sins, and expelled from the face of the earth, 2. and when the Just One shall appear in the presence of the just who are chosen, whose deeds hang on the Lord of the spirits, and the light shall appear to the just and to the chosen, who dwell on the earth,-where will be the habitation of the sinners, and where the resting-places of those who have denied the Lord of the spirits? It were better had they not been born. 3. And when the secrets of the just shall be revealed, then the sinners will be judged, and the impious will be expelled from the presence of the just and chosen. 4. And from that time those who hold the earth will not be powerful and exalted, nor will they be able to behold the face of the just, for the light of the Lord of the spirits is seen on the face of the holy and just and chosen. 5. And the mighty kings will perish at that time, and will be given over into the hands of the just and holy. 6. And from that time on no one can ask for mercy from the Lord of the spirits, for their lives have ended.
   CHAP. 39.-And it will come to pass in these days that the chosen and holy children will descend from the high heavens, and their seed will become one with the children of men.
2. In those days Enoch received books of zeal and of anger, and books of disturbance and of expulsion, and "mercy will not be upon them," said the Lord of the spirits. 3. And at that time, a cloud and a whirlwind seized me from the face of the earth, and carried me to the end of the heavens.  4. And here I saw another vision, the dwellings of the just and the resting-places of the holy. 5. Here my eyes saw their dwellings with the angels, and their resting-places with the holy, and they asked and petitioned and prayed in behalf of the children of men, and justice like water flowed before them, and mercy like dew on the earth; thus it is among them to all eternity. 6. And in those days my eyes saw the place of the chosen of justice and of faith [fidelity], and how justice will be in their days, and the just and chosen without number before him to all eternity. 7. And I saw their dwelling under the wings of the Lord of the spirits; and all the just and chosen before him are ornamented as with the light of fire, and their mouths are full of blessings, and their lips praise the name of the Lord of the spirits, and justice before him will not cease. 8. Here I desired to dwell, and my soul longed for this place; here my portion has been before, for such is established concerning me before the Lord of the spirits. 9. And in those days I blessed and exalted the name of the Lord of the spirits with blessings and praise, for he has strengthened me in blessing and praise according to the will of the Lord of the spirits. 10. For a long time my eyes looked at this place, and I blessed him, saying: "Bless him, and let him be blessed from the beginning and to eternity! 11. Before him there is no ceasing; he knows, before the world was created, what the world is, and will be from generation to generation. 12. Thee they praise who do not sleep; they stand before thy glory, and bless and glorify and exalt thee, saying: 'Holy! Holy! Holy! the Lord of the spirits fills the earth with spirits.'" 13. And here my eyes saw all those who do not sleep, standing before him and blessing him, and they say: "Blessed

art thou, and blessed the name of the Lord to all eternity." 14. And my face was changed until I could see no more.
   CHAP. 40.-And after that I saw a thousand times thousand, and ten thousand times ten thousand beings, an innumerable and immense multitude, who stood before the glory of the Lord of the spirits. 2. I looked, and on the four sides of the Lord of the spirits I saw four faces, different from those standing, and I learned their names, which the angel who came with me announced as their names to me, and showed me all the secrets. 3. And I heard the voices of those four faces as they blessed before the Lord of glory. 4. The first voice blessed the Lord of the spirits to all eternity. 5. And I heard the second voice praising the Chosen One and the chosen ones, who hang on the Lord of the spirits. 6. And I heard the third voice asking and praying for those who dwell on the earth, and petitioning in the name of the Lord of the spirits. 7. And I heard the fourth voice keeping off the satans, and not allowing them to come before the Lord of the spirits to accuse those who dwell on the earth. 8. After that I asked the angel of peace who went with me, who showed me all things that were hidden, and said to him: "Who are these four faces that I see, and whose voices I hear and have written them down?" 9. And he said to me: "The first is the holy Michael, merciful, slow to anger; and the second, who is over all sicknesses and over all the wounds of the children of men, is Rufael; and the third, who is over all the powers, is the holy Gabriel; and the fourth, who is over penitence and the hope of those who inherit everlasting life, if Fanuel." 10. And these are the four angels of God, the Most High, and the four voices I heard in those days.
    CHAP. 41.-And after this I saw all the secrets of heaven, and the kingdom as it is divided, and how the deeds of men are weighed upon scales. 2. There I saw the dwellings of the chosen, and the dwellings of the holy, and my eyes saw there how all the sinners were cast from there, they who had denied the name of the Lord of the spirits, and they are dragged away, and there is no rest for them because of the punishments which proceed from the Lord of the spirits. 3. And there my eyes saw the secrets of the lightning and of the thunder, and the secrets of the winds, how they are divided to blow over the earth, and the secrets of the clouds and of the dew, and there I saw also from what place they proceed, and from whence they satisfy the dust of the earth. 4. And there I saw the closed repositories, and from them the winds are divided out, and the repository of hail and the repository of fog and of the clouds; and his cloud hovers over the earth from the beginning of the world. 5. And I saw the repositories of the sun and of the moon, from whence they come and to which they return, and their glorious return, and how one is more glorious than the other, and their fixed course, and how they do not leave their course, and how they add nothing to their course and take nothing from it, and preserve their fidelity one with the other, remaining steadfast in their oath.  6. And first the sun goes out, and makes his way according to the command of the Lord of the spirits, and strong is his name to all eternity; 7. and after this the hidden and the revealed course of the moon, completing the course of her way in that place by day and by night, one looking at the other [i.e. opposite each other] before the Lord of the spirits; and they give thanks and praise and do not rest, for their thanksgiving is rest for them. 8. For the shining sun makes many changes for a blessing and for a curse, and the course of the path of

the moon is light to the just, and darkness to the sinners in the name of the Lord who created a separation between light and darkness, and divided the spirits of men, and strengthened the spirits of the just, in the name of his own justice. 9 For neither does an angel hinder, nor is any power able to hinder, for the Judge sees them all, and judges them all before him.
    CHAP. 42.-Wisdom did not find a place where she might live, and a dwelling-place was given to her in the heavens. 2. Wisdom came to dwell among the children of men, and found no dwelling-place; wisdom returned to her place and took her seat among the angels. 3. And injustice came forth from its repository; whom it did not seek, them it found, and dwelt with them, like the rain in the desert, and like dew in the thirsty land.
   CHAP. 43.-And again I saw lightning, and the stars of heaven, and I saw how he called them all by their names, and they heard him. 2. And I saw that they were weighed on the scales of justice, according to their light, according to the width of their places, and the day of their appearance, and their course; one flash of lightning produces another, and their course according to the number of angels, and their fidelity they preserved among themselves.
3. And I asked the angel, who went with me, who showed me what was secret: "What are these?" 4. And he said to me: "The Lord of the spirits has showed thee a picture of them: these are the names of the just, who dwell on the earth and believe on the name of the Lord of the spirits to all eternity."
CHAP. 44.-Also other things I saw in reference to the flashes of lightning; how they arise
from the stars, and become lightning, and can leave nothing behind with them.

    CHAP. 38, 1. The writer, who shows himself as much more systematic in everything than the author of the first book, states that what now follows is the first parable; and this continues to chap. 44. He immediately enters in medias res, showing both how important he considers his revelation and making it certain that at the author's time the hope for the Messianic times must have been especially prominent, else he would certainly have needed some explanatory words as introduction. Congregation of the just is explained in verse 3, 39:6; 53:6; 62:8, and is an expression entirely peculiar to the Parables; shall appear, i.e. when the Messianic rule shall be inaugurated. Expelled: the Parables teach that the sinners shall be destroyed, 53:5, in some unknown valley, 56:3, 4, for it is neither in heaven nor on earth, 45:2, 5, 6; 53:2, but the first book teaches emphatically that the place of eternal punishment is in the valley of Hinnom near Jerusalem, cf. notes on chap. 27.-2. Contemporaneous with this is the appearance of the Messiah, the Just one, a name applied to him because he is a just judge, and is found also 53:6. Just and chosen, one of the many names for the inhabitants of the Messianic kingdom; others are simply just, or chosen, or chosen just, holy and chosen, just and holy, just and good, children of God, children of heaven. It has been claimed that the expression it were better had they not been born was based on Matt. xxvi. 24, and that the Parables consequently were written after that Gospel, but this is without any foundation whatever, as the Old Testament presents sufficient premises for this statement in Job
iii. 3; Jer. xx. 14; Psalt. Salom. iii. 11; cf. the HTR in Pirke Aboth, Perek HTR, and in Kiddushim, Perek HTR, and the classical writers have any amount of similar expressions; cf. Spiess, l. c. pp. 38, 39, and Delitzsch in Zeitschrift für Luth. Theol., 1876, p. 405, Hermae Pastor iv. 2, 6.-3. The secrets of the just, i.e. the Messiah and his kingdom, for even in the days of the sinners he had been revealed to the just, 48:7; 62:7.-4. The important role that the mighty of the earth play in the Parables will soon appear. Light, in a moral and physical sense, cf. Num. vi. 25; Ps. civ. 2; cxxxix. 11, 12; Isa. ix. 1, 2; lx.; Zech. xiv. 6 sqq.; Dan. xii. 3 and often in Enoch.-5. Mighty kings are the object of the writer's threats, instead of the sinners in general, as is the case in the first part, cf. 46:4-8; 48:8-10; 53:5; 62:1-12, 63, while they are only casually mentioned as one kind of sinners 96:8; 104:3.-6. The judgment is irrevocable.

    CHAP. 39. The contrast with the children of men compels us to believe the children of heaven to be the angels; cf. note on 6:1. Although the angels are not called chosen by the Old Testament or by Enoch elsewhere, but first by 1 Tim. v. 21, the name could easily be applied to them, partly from the GTR of Tob.
viii. 15, partly from the fact that it is the general appellation of those with whom their fate is to be united. A parallel statement is that even the Messiah shall dwell with men during his reign, 45:4; 62:14, and thus "heaven shall be on earth," cf. Jonath, ad Zach. iii. 7. Their seed will be one, of course not in the sinful manner of the fallen angels and the women, but rather as in 62:14.-2. The sudden change of subjects is somewhat surprising, but as the writer has announced in general terms the wonderful changes introduced by the Messiah he mist explain how these are to be effected, viz. by a judgment. Books, i.e. books containing an account of the judgment, but to specify further as to what books he refers is impossible. It is even possible that the word books is chosen simply on account of Enoch's literary character, but cf. 93:1-3.-3. Cf. note on 14:8.-4. The sudden change again to the subject of the first verse almost forces the belief that something is wrong with verse 2, unless it is an adverbial clause specifying the time of his vision concerning the home of the just.-5. The vision is entirely prophetic, for the writer has as little to say concerning the happiness of saints in heaven as the Old Testament has; the Messianic kingdom is, as it were, now yet in heaven. In view of this, that it is not yet determined who shall belong to that kingdom, the angels petition (cf. note on 15:1, 2) for mankind, and in view of chap. 50; 90:29-38; 91:14 (cf. notes) that many may take part. With these angels are justice and mercy, with the side idea that these shall be brought down with them when they descend, vs. 1. Water and dew are symbols of plenty, cf. Isa. xi. 9; Micah v. 6.-6. Faith (cf. note on 58:5), certainly not in a Christian sense; the word haimanoth means also fidelity, i.e. to God. Then it is very easily possible that the Christian translator uses a word here that may not exactly express the original, cf. Herzog
R. E. xii. p. 310 (ed. 1).-7. Under the wings, a symbol of protection, Ex. xix. 4; Deut. xxxii. 11, 12; xxxiii.
12; Matt. xxiii. 37; cf. note on 38:2.-8. Cf. 71:14-17; 90:31.-9. Cf. 37:4.-11. The eternity and foreknowledge of God is extolled because they have been exemplified in vs. 8.-12, 13. Who do not sleep, cf. note on 12:2. The change of the Trisagion (Isa. vi. 3) in this passage is according to the contents of the Parables, and especially because God is here the Lord of the spirits.-14. Could not see, i.e. was blinded by the glory he saw; cf. 14:24, 25; Ascensio Isaiae ix. 38.
    CHAP. 40. Cf. note on 1:9. The transition from the description of the Messianic kingdom to the glories of heaven is easily explained by the connection between the two as laid down in the previous chapter.-2. Distinct from the multitude before the Lord are the four special angels, whose special name being HTR, a name taken from Isa. lxiii. 9, are here accordingly represented as faces. The same distinction is observed 71:1, and rigidly by rabbinical writers, cf. Buxtorf, Lex. (ed. Fischer), p. 27, and Herzog R. E. iv. p. 20 sqq. (ed. 1). This verse is used in Pirke Elieser c. 4. The angel who came with me is the angel of peace in verse 8; cf. 52:5; 53:4; 54:4; 56:2, where he receives this name, and 43:3; 46:2; 52:3, 4; 61:2, 3; 64:2. Who he is, is not mentioned, but Hoffmann's conjecture of Uriel is not improbable, especially as the Parables, unlike the almost unanimous verdict of later Judaism (cf. Buxtorf, l. c.), do not make him one of the four chief angels, but put Fanuel in his place; cf. vs. 9 and 71:8. His name is taken from his functions as the opposite of the satans, or possibly as the well known angel of death, cf. Jonath. on Hab. iii. 5.-4. The first one praises the Lord, an idea probably taken from Isa. vi. 3, and according to verse 9 this is Michael. His name is take from his work, for his cry is HTR (cf. Buxtorf, l. c.). He is here already, like in later works (cf. Herzog, R. E., l. c. p. 27), the HTR, or the Metatron, and as such he has attributes which are generally assigned to God alone.-5. The second praises the Chosen One, i.e. the Messiah, the most frequent name for him, found also 45:3-5; 49:2; 51:3, 5; 52:6-9; 53:6; 55:4; 61:5, 8; 62:1. He is so called because he has been chosen by the Lord of the spirits, 46:3. The name taken from Isa. xlii. 1 is peculiar to the Parables, and is found in no other apocryphal book. The estimate put on the Messiah here in making him the object of praise by one of the highest angels is seriously diminished by having the chosen ones put into the same category, and further by the fact that nothing more is meant here than that they are both objects of the special concern of this angel; and as 61:10 the Chosen One is included in the host of those that praise the Lord, the idea of a Christian origin cannot be entertained

for a second. This angel is, vs. 9, Rufael; cf. notes on 10:7; 20:3, and the healing by Rafael in Tob. iii. 17.-6. The third is Gabriel, over all the powers, his name being from HTR and HTR.-7. The fourth wards off the satans. These beings, altogether unknown to the writer of the first part, and entirely distinct from the fallen angels or their children, are conceived by the writer of the Parables as the powers of an anti-divine kingdom under the leadership of a prince, who is Satan, GTR, 53:3. These satans existed before the fall of the angels, for these sinned by becoming subjects of Satan, 54:6, and they, unlike the watchers, 13:5; 14:5, have access to heaven, on the basis of Job ii. 1; Zech. iii. To this kingdom of Satan belong also the angels of punishment, cf. notes on 53:3. Satans are mentioned in the Noachic additions, 65:6; cf. Ascensio Isaiae ii. 2. The fourth angel is Fanuel, and as he keeps off the satans he thereby protects those who inherit everlasting life, cf. note on 37:4.- 8. Angel of peace, cf. vs. 2.
    CHAP. 41, 1. As the writer of the first part was initiated into the secrets of the physical world as well as the spiritual, the author here also gives a treatise on natural philosophy, but not without first again having spoken of his favorite topic, of the dwellings of the just. The kingdom is scarcely the Messianic (Dillmann), but rather the kingdom of this world, which is to be divided, i.e. the faithful separated from the sinners, when the deeds of all are weighed in the final judgment. Interpreting thus it is easily seen why he mentions the fate of both the just and the sinners in the next verse. Weighed, cf. 61:8; Prov. xvi. 2; xxi. 2; xxiv. 12; Job xxxi. 6; Ps. lxii. 9; Dan. v. 27; 4 Ezra I. 35 (ed. Laurence), and Homer, Il. 8, 69 sqq.; 22, 209 sqq.-2. Expulsion of the sinners, cf. note ch. 27. Deny, a sin often mentioned in the Parables, cf. 38:2; 45:1, 2; 46:7; 48:10, (denying the just judgment, 60:6, or the heavenly sphere, 45:1, or the Messiah, 48:10, or the spirit of God, 67:10). It is pictured as the chief and principal sin.-3. The introducing clause is different from the one employed in the first part, where the writer always says: "And I went and saw." How they are divided, cf. Job xxxviii. 24, 25, 35.-4. The repositories of the wind are closed as the winds are allowed to escape only at certain times; cf. Job xxxviii. 22, 25-28, 34, 37, 38; xxxvii. 11, 12. His cloud; Dillmann thinks of the Shechinah, Langen, p. 293, of "the spirit hovering over the deep," but the statement is so vague that no conclusion can be attempted.-5. These repositories must, then, be near the portals of 33:3 sqq.; cf. Ps. xix. 6. Glorious return,
i.e. their secret return from west to east. More glorious, i.e. the sun than the moon; cf. chap. 72 sqq. Oath; the luminaries have taken oaths among themselves to be true to each other, 43:2, a figure probably taken from the marriage vow; cf. 69:20, 25.-6. Strong, for even the mighty sun obeys him; cf. Ps. lxxiv. 16; civ. 19; Eccles. I. 5.-7. Hidden course of the moon, the time when she is not seen in the heavens; cf. chap. 73 and 74. Praise, cf. Ps. xix. 2 sqq.; cxlviii. 3 sqq.; Job xxxviii. 3.- 8. The writer plays on the biblical expression, children of light and of darkness; cf. Job xxiv. 13-17; xxxviii. 15; En. 59.
    CHAP. 42, 1. Drummond (p. 62) is certainly right in calling this "a detached fragment," for it apparently interrupts the sense. The only possible connection it could have would be that wisdom was in the hands of God his means of strengthening the just, 41:8, or that wisdom and injustice have repositories like the powers of nature of which he is here speaking; cf. vs. 3. Wisdom found no place to dwell, i.e. on earth, and returns to heaven; cf. Job xxviii. 12-14, 20-24; Baruch iii. 31. Wisdom is here personified as in Prov. viii. and ix.-2. Cf. Prov. I. 20 sqq.; viii. 1 sqq.; ix. 1 sqq.; Son of Sirach xxiv. 7. In the Messianic times, however, she will return, 48:1 sqq.; 49:1 sqq.; 91:10.-3. As wisdom in the author's mind is the biblical wisdom, its opposite here is injustice; cf. Zech. v. 8. The contrast here is a success. Although the expression here sounds somewhat like John's prologue to his Gospel, the connection goes no further, and does not betray a Christian source; cf. Langen, p. 44 sq. Dew and rain are symbols of plenty, cf. on 39:5; Job xxxviii. 26, 27; Isa. xxxv. 6; xli. 18; xliii. 20.
    CHAP. 43. 1, 2. He continues the topic of chapter 41 with the stars. Called, cf. Isa. xl. 26; Ps. cxlvii. 4; Baruch iii. 34. Weighed, as the context shows, means simply that their mass, course, etc. is assigned to them in a manner pleasing to a higher power. They are guided by angels. Neither here nor above is any personality or moral accountability attributed to them, although their conduct is to be an example for men, cf. in general Dan. viii. 10 with En. 46:7, and Dan. xii. 3 with En. 104:2, and thus the stars can represent the names of the just. With this we can understand the strange answer of the angel in verse 4. Believe, the opposite of denying,

cf. note on 41:2, believing being the great characteristic of the faithful; cf. 58:5. Name, for the being or person it represents, as often in the Parables.
CHAP. 44. Here he certainly means nothing but the shooting stars.


SECTION VIII.

   CHAP. 45.- And this is the second Parable concerning those who deny the name of the dwelling-place of the holy and of the Lord of the spirits. 2. They will not ascend to heaven, and will not come on the earth; such will be the portion of the sinners who deny the name of the Lord of the spirits, who are thus preserved to the day of suffering and sorrow. 3. On that day the chosen One will sit upon the throne of glory, and will choose among their [i.e. men's] deeds and places without number, and their spirit will become strong in them when they see my Chosen One and those who have called upon my holy and glorious name. 4. And on that day I will cause my Chosen One to dwell among them, and will transform heaven and make it a blessing and a light eternally. 5. And I will transform the earth and make it a blessing, and will cause my chosen ones to dwell thereon; and those who have committed sins and crimes will not step on it. 6. For I have seen and satisfied with peace my just ones, and have placed them before me; but for the sinners there awaits before me a judgment, that I may destroy them from the face of the earth.
   CHAP. 46.-And there I saw one who had a head of days [i.e. was old], and his head was white like wool; and with him was a second whose countenance was like the appearance of a man, and his countenance was full of agreeableness, like one of the holy angels. 2. And I asked one of the angels, who went with me, and who showed me all the secrets, concerning this son of man, who he was and whence he was, and why he goes with the Head of days?
3. And he answered and said to me: "This is the Son of man, who has justice, and justice dwells with him, and all the treasures of secrecy he reveals, because the Lord of the spirits has chosen him, and his portion overcomes all things before the Lord of the spirits in rectitude to eternity. 4. And this Son of man, whom thou hast seen, will arouse the kings and mighty from their couches, and the strong from their thrones, and will loosen the bands of the strong, and will break the teeth of the sinners. 5. And he will expel the kings from their thrones and from their kingdoms, because they do not exalt him and praise him, and do not acknowledge humbly whence the kingdom was given to them. 6. And he will expel the countenance of the strong; and shame will fill them: darkness will be their dwelling-place and worms will become their couches, and they will have no hope of rising from their couches, because they do not exalt the name of the Lord of spirits. 7. And these are they who master the stars of heaven, and raise their hands against the Most High, and tread the earth and live thereon, and all their doing is injustice and their doing manifests injustice, and their power is in their riches, and their faith is in gods which they have made with their hands, and they have denied the name of the Lord of the spirits. 8. And they will be cast out of the houses of his congregations, and of the faithful who hang on the name of the Lord of the spirits."

   CHAP. 47.-And in those days the prayer of the just, and the blood of the just one ascend from the earth before the Lord of the spirits. 2. In these days the holy ones, who dwell in high heaven, will unite in one voice, and will petition and pray and praise and thank and bless the name of the Lord of the spirits, on account of the blood of the just which has been spilled, and the prayer of the just, that it may not be in vain before the Lord of the spirits, that judgment may be held over them, and they not suffer to eternity. 3. And in those days I saw the Head of days, as he sat upon the throne of his glory, and the books of the living were opened before him, and his whole host, which is in high heaven and around him, stood before him. 4. And the hearts of the holy ones were filled with joy, because the number of justice was fulfilled and the prayers of the just had been heard and the blood of the just one had been demanded before the Lord of the spirits.
   CHAP. 48.-And at that place I saw an inexhaustible fountain of justice; and around it many fountains of wisdom, and all the thirsty drank out of them and were filled with wisdom, and their dwelling-places were with the just and holy and chosen. 2. And at that hour that Son of man was called near the Lord of the spirits, and his name before the Head of days. 3. And before the sun and the signs were created, before the stars of heaven were made, his name was called before the Lord of the spirits. 4. He will be a staff to the just and the holy, upon which they will support themselves and not fall, and he will be the light of the nations, and he will be the hope of those who are sick in their hearts. 5. All who live upon the earth will fall down before him and bend the knee to him, and will bless and praise him and will sing psalms to the name of the Lord of the spirits. 6. For this purpose he was chosen and hidden before him before the world was created, and he will be before him to eternity. 7. And the wisdom of the Lord of the spirits has revealed him to the holy and the just, for he preserves the portion of the just, because they have hated and despised this world of injustice, and have hated all its deeds and ways in the name of the Lord of the spirits; for in his name they will be saved, and he will be the revenger of their lives. 8. And in those days the countenances of the kings of the earth, and of the mighty who possess the earth, will be bent down on account of the deeds of their hands, for on the day of their terror and trouble their souls will not be saved. 9. And I will put them into the hands of my chosen, like straw in fire and like lead in water; thus they will burn before the face of the just, and sink before the face of the holy, and no trace of them will be found. 10. And on the day of their trouble, there will be rest on the earth; before him they will fall and not rise again, and there will be no one to take them with his hands and lift them up, because they have denied the Lord of the spirits and his Anointed. The name of the Lord of the spirits be blessed!
   CHAP. 49.-For wisdom is poured out like water, and glory does not cease before him to all eternity. 2. For he is powerful in all the secrets of justice; and injustice, like a shadow, will end, having no stability, because the Chosen One has arisen before the Lord of the spirits and his glory is to all eternity, and his power to all generations. 3. In him dwells the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit of him who imparts understanding, and the spirit of doctrine and of power, and the spirit of those asleep in justice. 4. And he will judge the secrets, and no one will be able to speak a vain word before him, because he is the Chosen One before the Lord

of the spirits, according to his will.
   CHAP. 50.-And in those days there will be a change for the holy and chosen, and the light of the days will dwell over them, and glory and honor will be turned over to the holy.
2. And on the day of trouble, evil will gather over 